
kombinasyon: delight lament manufacture lovable exist 
metin:  delight, and a transcendent happiness; the traces 
of which are to be observed and seen. 

Yes, through change and transformation, decline and transience, beings 
are driven on at speed within the astonishing activity necessitated by these 
attributes; they are constantly sent from the Manifest World to the World 
of  the  Hereafter.  Under  the  manifestations  of  the  attributes,  creatures  are 
shaken up in a continual ﬂow and ﬂood, motion and movement, scattering 
to the ears of the heedless the lamentations of death and separation, and to 

TWENTY-FOURTH LETTER – SECOND STATION

355

the hearing of the people of guidance a clamour of gloriﬁcation and recital 
of Allah’s names. It is by virtue of this mystery that all beings depart leav-
ing behind them in existence meanings, qualities, and states which will each 
be a means to the manifestation of the Necessarily Existent One’s eternal 
attributes.

Furthermore,  beings  depart  leaving  behind  them  the  stages  and  states 
they have undergone throughout their lives – a detailed existence which rep-
resents their external existence – on the Preserved Tablet, and in the Clear 
Book and Clear Record, and other spheres of existence like these that pertain 
to divine knowledge. This means that every transitory being abandons one 
existence and gains thousands of permanent existences. 

For example, a number of common substances are thrown into a wondrous 
machine in a factory; they burn up inside it and are apparently destroyed, but 
in those vats valuable chemical substances are precipitated. Also, through 
its force and steam, the factory’s machinery works: in one area of it textiles 
are woven, in another books are printed, while in another sweets and other 
rare confections are manufactured; and so on; it produces these. That is to 
say, thousands of things come into existence through the burning of those 
common substances and their apparent destruction. One common existence 
departs but leaves a legacy of numerous elevated existences. Can one there-
fore feel sorry for the common substance? Can one complain about the fac-
tory owner because he did not pity it and burnt it, destroying those lovable 
substances?

Similarly,  ( 16:60 )   j  i  h  as  necessitated  by  mercy,  wisdom, 
and  lovingnes
kitap: 3 - thread: 6 - index: 972820
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


kombinasyon: confusion extol transitory twig nullify 
metin:  confusion, forms 
a testimony through them as a whole to the unity and oneness of their Neces-
sarily Existent Maker.

Also, just as they testify to Your necessary existence and unity, so too 
the  nurturing  and  administration  in  hundreds  of  ways  of  the  innumerable 
members of the army of living creatures on the face of the earth, which is 
formed of four hundred thousand different nations, perfectly, with no con-
fusion or difﬁculty, point to the majesty of Your dominicality within Your 
unity and to the immensity of Your power, which creates a ﬂower as eas-
ily as the spring, and its comprehending all things. They point also to the 
unlimited breadth of Your mercy, which prepares innumerable varieties of 
foods for animals and human beings all over the earth; and through all those 
works  and  bestowals,  administering  and  nurturing,  being  carried  out  with 
perfect regularity, and everything, even minute particles, being obedient and 
subjugated to those commands, they indicate certainly the inﬁnite extent of 
Your rule; and through every part of those trees and plants, like their leaves, 
blossoms, fruits, roots, branches, and twigs, being made with every aspect of 
them being known and seen, in accordance with useful purposes, instances 
of wisdom, and beneﬁts, they point clearly with innumerable ﬁngers to Your 
knowledge,  which  embraces  all  things,  and  to  the  comprehensiveness  of 
Your wisdom. With innumerable tongues, they praise and extol the utterly 
perfect beauty of Your art and the sheer beauty of Your perfect bestowal.

Also, these precious gifts and bounties and this extraordinary outlay and 
bestowal, in this temporary hostel and transitory guesthouse, for this brief 
time  and  ﬂeeting  life,  indicate  through  the  hands  of  the  trees  and  plants, 
indeed, testify, that in order not to make all creatures say, contrary to the 
necessary result of all His expense and bestowal which is to make Himself 
loved and known: “ You gave us a taste, but then executed us without per-
mitting us to eat; ” and not to nullify the sovereignty of His Godhead, and 
not deny His inﬁnite mercy and make it denied, and in order not to turn all 

THE THIRD RAY

63

his yearning friends into enemies through depriving them thus, the muniﬁ-
kitap: 4 - thread: 6 - index: 151162
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


kombinasyon: force garment modest obtain mankind 
metin:  force not combined with the laws of truth, they 
will not be fruitful among the mass of the people.

35.  Tyranny  has  donned  the  hat  of  justice;  treachery  has  clothed  itself  in 
the garment of patriotism;  j i h a d  has been given the name of rebellion; 
captivity has been called freedom! Opposites have exchanged forms!

36. Politics which revolves around beneﬁt is savagery.

548

BEDIUZZAMAN SAID NURSI – LETTERS

37. To show friendliness towards a hungry beast excites not its compassion 

but its hunger. Both its fangs and its claws will want their rent!
38. Time has shown that Paradise is not cheap, nor Hell unnecessary.
39. While  the  qualities  of  those  known  by  the  world  as  the  upper  classes 
should be the cause of modesty and humility, they have led to oppression 
and arrogance. And while the poverty and powerlessness of the poor and 
common  people  should  be  the  cause  of  compassion  and  bounty,  they 
have resulted in servitude and enthralment.

40. So long as honour and good things are to be obtained from something, 
they offer it to the upper classes, but if it is something bad, they divide it 
among the ordinary people.

41. If a person lacks an imagined goal, or if he forgets it or pretends to for 

get it, his thoughts will perpetually revolve around his ‘I’.

42. The origin of all revolutions and corruption, and the spur and source of 

all bad morals are just two sayings:
The First Saying: “ So long as I’m full, what is it to me if others die of 
hunger? ”
The Second Saying: “ You suffer hardship so that I can live in ease; you 
work so that I can eat. ”
There is only one remedy for extirpating the ﬁrst saying, and that is the 
obligatory payment of z a k a t . While the remedy for the second is the pro-
hibition of usury and interest. Qur’anic justice stands at the door of the 
world  and  says  to  usury  and  interest:  “ No  entry!  It  is  forbidden!  You 
don’t have the right to enter here! ” Mankind did not heed the command, 
and received a severe blow. So it must heed it before it receives one even 
more severe!

43. War between nations and states is relinquishing its place to war between 
the classes of mankind. For just as man does not want to be a slave, so he 
does not want to be a labourer.

44. The per
kitap: 3 - thread: 5 - index: 1456120
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


kombinasyon: prison involve soul incident pronouncement 
metin:  prisoner-  of-war  to  the  Russian 

1.  In his writings, Bediuzzaman mentions h â s  ( select ) by which he probably meant 
those that loyally and devotedly served the R i s a l e - i   N u r , and e r k a n  ( leading; lit. pillars ), 
those who in addition to their devoted service played a more organizing role. [ Tr. ]

THE FOURTEENTH RAY 

453

commander-in-chief’s  order  for  his  execution;  who  with  a  speech  during 
the  Thirty-First  of  March  Incident  induced  eight  regiments  to  obey  their 
ofﬁcers; 1 and in the Military Court, disregarding the threat of execution said 
in reply to the presiding pashas’ questions of: “ You too are a reactionary, 
you too wanted the Shari‘a? ”, “ If constitutionalism consists of one party’s 
despotism,  then  let  all  men  and  jinn  witness  that  I  am  a  reactionary  and 
ready to sacriﬁce my very soul for a single matter of the Shari‘a, ” causing 
those high-ranking ofﬁcers to appreciate and admire him, and while expect-
ing his execution, they decided on his acquittal, then on being released, he 
did not thank them but went on his way shouting: “ Long live Hell for all 
tyrants! ”; and as is written in the decision of Afyon Court, when Mustafa 
Kemal angrily said to him in the ofﬁce of the Speaker of the Assembly:  2 
“ We summoned you here so you would tell us of your elevated ideas, but 
you  came  and  wrote  some  things  about  the  ﬁve  daily  prayers  and  sowed 
conﬂict among us, ” he replied: “ After belief, the obligatory prayers are the 
most elevated question. Those who do not perform the prayers are traitors, 
and  the  pronouncements  of  traitors  are  to  be  rejected; ”  who  said  this  in 
the presence of forty to ﬁfty deputies, and forced that fearsome commander 
to swallow his anger and make a sort of apology; and in connection with 
whom not one matter has been recorded by the police and authorities of six 
provinces connected with the disturbance of public order; and among whose 
hundreds of thousands of students not the smallest incident has been wit-
nessed ( apart from one insigniﬁcant incident concerning a rightful defence 
in which one unimportant student was involved ); in connection with none 
of whose students any crime has been heard; and whichever prison he has 
bee
kitap: 4 - thread: 2 - index: 1191086
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


kombinasyon: treat verse freedom offence release 
metin:  treatise 
about the veiling of women, a single matter, and gave a light sentence under 
a ﬂexible law. When they did this, I wrote the following in the correction 
which after the Appeal Court I sent ofﬁcially to Ankara as the sole example 
of illegality:

A long time ago, following the consensus and rulings of three hundred 
and ﬁfty thousand Qur’anic commentaries, I expounded the Qur’anic verses 
about the veiling of women, which for one thousand three hundred and ﬁfty 
years have taught and enjoined a powerful, perpetual Islamic practice and 
sacred principle of three hundred and ﬁfty million people, in order to defend 
them  against  an  atheist’s  objections  and  his  criticisms  of  Qur’anic  civili-
zation. If there is any justice in the world, the court will surely quash the 
conviction of someone and the sentence passed on him for expounding the 
verses, since he was following the way taken by our forefathers for one thou-
sand three hundred and ﬁfty years; it will surely remove this extraordinary 
stain from the legal establishment of this Islamic state.

412

THE RAYS

I wrote this in the addendum containing my corrections and showed it to 
the public prosecutor. He was horriﬁed and said: “ There is no need for this. 
Your sentence was short and only a small part of it remains. There is no need 
to send this. ”

Thus, you have understood the truly strange examples like this one in my 
defence and objection, which has been presented to you and the departments 
of government in Ankara. What I seek and hope from Afyon Court is this: 
I await from you in the name of true justice that you decide on the com-
plete freedom of the R i s a l e - i   N u r , whose service and effulgence proﬁts the 
nation and country as much as an army. Otherwise, I have to inform you that 
when the ﬁve or ten of my friends who were sent to prison because of their 
relations with me are released, I have the idea of committing some offence 
which will necessitate the heaviest penalty, compelling me to bid farewell to 
this life. It is like this:

Although for the good of the country and nation, the government should 
give me full protection and assist me, the fact that it is pressurizing me sug-
gests that part of the communist organization and the secret atheistic society 
kitap: 4 - thread: 4 - index: 1081207
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


kombinasyon: community reliance stature great abase 
metin:  community,  everyone  has  a 
window, called a rank, in which to see and be seen.

If the window is larger than a person’s stature and worth, he will stretch and 
lengthen through pride. But if the window is smaller than his stature and 
aspiration, he will bend and bow down out of modesty.

In the mature and perfected, the measure of greatness is smallness. While in 

the faulty, the measure of littleness is bigness.

* * *
If Qualities Change Places, Their Natures Change
One quality, different places, one face. It is sometimes a demon, sometimes 
an  angel,  sometimes  upright,  sometimes  wicked;  some  examples  are 
these:

An attribute which for the weak in the face of the strong is considered to be 

dignity, if found in the strong, is pride and arrogance.

An attribute which for the strong before the weak is considered to be humility, 

if found in the weak, is abasement and hypocrisy.

In  his  ofﬁce,  a  person  of  authority’s  gravity  is  dignity,  and  his  humility 
abasement.  But  in  his  house,  his  humility  is  modesty,  and  his  gravity, 
arrogance.

Tolerance in someone speaking on his own account is patriotism, and self-

sacriﬁce, a quality, a good deed.

But if the person is speaking on account of others, his tolerance is treachery, 

and self-sacriﬁce, an attribute, a wicked act.

GLEAMS

819

In  setting  up  the  preliminaries  reliance  on Allah  is  laziness.  But  handing 
over to Him when reaping the consequences is the reliance taught by the 
Shari‘a.

Contentment  with  one’s  lot  in  respect  of  the  fruits  of  one’s  labour  is 

praiseworthy contentment, and strengthens the desire to work.

But sufﬁcing with existent goods is not desirable contentment, but lack of 

aspiration. There are numerous other examples.

The Qur’an mentions absolute good works and t a q w a . By its indeﬁniteness, it 
hints at the existence of degrees; its conciseness is a detailed explanation; 
its silence, an expansive word.

* * *
Both ‘Truth Will Prevail,’ and Its Consequences, 
Are Intended
Friend! One time, a questioner asked: “ Since ‘truth will prevail’ is the truth, 
why have the inﬁdel prevailed over the Muslim, and force over right? ”
I replied: Consider these four points and your difﬁculty will be resolved. The 

ﬁrst point is t
kitap: 1 - thread: 1 - index: 2094584
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


kombinasyon: efforts court deceive crush commit 
metin:  efforts of anarchy to destroy public order under the veil of communism. 
They work to maintain public order and security so that these twenty years 
three or four related courts and the police of ten provinces have not been 
able  to  find  or  record  any  incidents  involving  the  infringement  of  public 
order connected with the R i s a l e - i   N u r  students, who are very numerous and 
found in every part of the country. And the fair-minded police of three prov-
inces stated: “ The R i s a l e - i   N u r  students are moral police. They assist us in 
preserving  public  order.  Through  certain,  affirmative  belief,  they  leave  in 
everyone’s head who reads the R i s a l e - i   N u r  something that restrains them 
from committing misdemeanours. They work to maintain public order. ”

An example of this was Denizli Prison. When the  R i s a l e - i   N u r  entered 
there and  F r u i t s   o f   B e l i e f  was written for the prisoners, within a space of 
three or four months more than two hundred of those prisoners became so 
extraordinarily obedient and acquired such religious and righteous conduct 
that  a  man  who  had  murdered  three  or  four  people  refrained  from  killing 
bedbugs even. They became completely compassionate, harmless members 
of the nation. The officials were astonished at this situation and looked on 
in appreciation. Some youths even said before receiving their sentences: “ If 
the Nurjus remain in prison, we shall try to have ourselves convicted so that 
we can be taught by them and become like them. We shall reform ourselves 
through their instruction. ”

So those who accuse the R i s a l e - i   N u r  students, who are thus, of disturb-
ing public order are surely seriously deceived, or have been fooled, or know-
ingly or unknowingly are deceiving the government on account of anarchy, 
and try to crush and repress us. We say this to them: 

Since  death  is  not  to  be  killed,  and  the  grave  is  not  to  be  closed,  and 
the  travellers  in  this  guesthouse  of  the  world,  convoy  after  convoy  enter 
the earth with great speed and ado, and vanish; for sure we shall part from 
one  another  very  soon.  You  shall  receive  the  penalty  for  your  tyranny  in 
awful fashion. At the very least you sh
kitap: 2 - thread: 2 - index: 863981
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


kombinasyon: delusion tenet authorit illustrate ruler 
metin:  delusion, and concealed itself. And it 
had the right, for we mixed i s r a i l i y y a t  1 with the fundamentals of belief, and 
stories with the tenets of faith, and metaphors with the truths of belief, and 
did not appreciate its value. So to punish us in this world, it left us in abase-
ment and penury. And what will save us, is again its mercy.

O Muslim brothers! We shall offer it an apology. Together we shall dec-
lare our loyalty and pay it allegiance. We shall grasp hold of its strong rope.
Also, I declare fearlessly that what has stirred me up and given me the 
courage to contest the ideas of past centuries, and to defend against the ima-
ginings and misapprehensions that have gained strength through the strate-
gies of hundreds of years, is my certain conviction that truth will sprout and 
grow, although it is concealed in the earth; and its partisans and supporters 
will be triumphant, although they may be weak and few in number due to the 
inclemency of time and place.

It is also my belief that it shall be the reality of Islam (   h a k i k a t - ı  İ s l a m i y e   )  
which will prevail over the future and be absolute ruler in every continent. 
It is Islam that will conquer them; the signs of this are to be seen. For in the 
past, eight obstacles prevented the Illustrious Shari‘a vanquishing comple-
tely the bigotry and blind imitation of tent-dwellers in their far-ﬂung priva-
tion, and the embellished trivia and despotism of house-dwellers in the lands 
of ignorance. But now they have been routed by three truths, or are being 
routed. The obstacles obstructing the Europeans were their blind imitation, 
ignorance, and bigotry, and the authority of their priests; while those obs-
tructing us were various forms of despotism, immorality, our confused cir-
cumstances, and despair, which leads to idleness. These obstacles caused the 
steady eclipsing of the sun of Islam.

1.   İ s r a i l i y y a t  ( Ar.  i s r ā ’ ī l i y y ā t  ): the body of narrative material derived from Jewish 
and Christian sources that from an early date was introduced into Islam and used chieﬂy 
in t a f s i r s  and histories to illustrate and enlarge upon topics about which few details were 
given or known.

16

A PRESCRIPTION FOR THE ULEMA

The  eighth,  and  princi
kitap: 6 - thread: 6 - index: 19045
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

