3

From the 
Risale-i Nur Collection 4 

THE RAYS 
Collection 

Bediuzzaman 
SAID NURSI 

 

4

Translated from the Turkish ‘Şuâlar’ 
by Şükran Vahide 

Copyright    1998, 2001, 2002, 2007 by Sözler Neşriyat A.Ş. 

For information, address: 
Sözler Neşriyat A.S., Nuruosmaniye Cad., Sorkun Han, No: 28/2, 
Cağaloğlu, Istanbul, Turkey.  
Tel: 0212 527 10 10   Fax: 0212 520 82 31 
Internet: www.sozler.com.tr 
e-mail: info@sozler.com.tr 

 

 

5

Contents 

THE SECOND RAY:  This forms the seventh ‘Point’ about the Six Greatest Names 
and  is  about  the  Greatest  Name  of  ‘God,  the One.’ It contains three ‘Stations’ 
and a Conclusion 

13 

First Station: Three ‘fruits’ of the affirmation of Divine unity 

15 

First Fruit:  In Divine unity and the affirmation of it, Divine beauty and dominical 

perfection become apparent 

15 

Second  Fruit:  The  perfections  of  the  universe  are  realized  through  Divine  unity, 

and the elevated duties of beings are understood 

19 

Third Fruit: All man’s perfections and his lofty aims are tied to Divine unity 

23 

Second Station: Three matters necessitating Divine unity  27 

The First: The limitless, absolute attributes and Names, the works of which are to 

be observed in the universe 

27 

The  Second:  The  ease  in  unity  and  difficulties  and  impossibilities  in  associating 

The  Third:  One  who  creates  any  single  being  must  be  the  one  who  creates  the 

partners with God 

31 

whole universe  35 

Third Station: Three universal signs of the affirmation of Divine unity 

37 

First Sign and Proof: ‘He is One’: in everything is a unity and unity points to one

Second  Sign:  ‘He  has  no  partners’:  in everything is a faultless order and balance, 

and these can occur only through unity, for interference causes confusion 

38 

What do you say to the ugliness, tribulations and death found among the beauty and 

  37 

good?  39 

Why does the Absolutely Compassionate One inflict evil? 40 

 

6

Third Sign: The innumerable stamps of Divine unity alluded to by the phrase: ‘His 

is the dominion and His is the praise’   41 

Conclusion  44 

A question related to the resurrection of the dead  45 
A Supplication about Divine Unity  48 

THE  THIRD  RAY:  A  Supplication  which  expounds  the  verse:  Behold!  In  the 

creation of the heavens and the earth [to the end of the verse] 

50 

THE FOURTH RAY: A subtle point about the verse: For us God suffices and He is 

the Best Disposer of Affairs, in six ‘Degrees’  70 

The  First  Degree:  The  true  pleasure  of  immortality  lies  in  the  immortality  of  the 

Enduring One of Perfection, and in affirming Him and believing in Him 

71 

The Second Degree: Through the relation resulting from belief, with his impotence 
and poverty, man may rely on the infinite power and strength of the Munificent 
Provider 74 

The Third Degree: The disposals of creative power and man’s importance, despite 

his apparent insignificance 

75 

The Fourth Degree: The relations and existences belief gains for man 

78 

The  Fifth  Degree:  Life  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Ever-Living  and  Self-

Subsistent One, in four ‘Matters’ 

80 
First Matter: The essence and reality of life 
Second Matter: The true rights of life 
81 
Third Matter: The innate duties of life, in three ‘Ways’  81 
Fourth Matter: The true pleasure and happiness of life  82 

81 

The  Sixth Degree: Three proofs that all the instances  of beauty displayed by these 
transient  beings  are  the  signs,  flashes,  and  manifestations  of  an  eternal,  sacred 
Beauty  83 

First  Proof:  The  beauty  of  a  finely  crafted  object  points  to  the  beauty  of  the 

craftsman 

84 

Second Proof contains five ‘Points’: 

First Point: The beauties in beings are the shadows of a sacred, hidden Beauty 85 
Second Point: The successive transitory beings display an unchanging beauty  85 
Third Point: The bestowal of beauty is from the beautiful 

85 

 

7

Fourth  Point:  Each  of  the  Divine  Names  possesses  a  sacred  beauty  a  single 

manifestation of which makes beautiful the vast world 85 

Fifth Point: The universe was made an exhibition of wonders in order to display 

the beauties of its Maker 

88 

Third Proof consists of three ‘Points’ 

88 
First  Point:  Creatures  are  intentionally  adorned  and  made  beautiful  in  order  to 

make known their Maker and to make Him loved 

88 

Second Point: Mankind’s genuine love of God points to a peerless Beauty 
89 
Third Point: Existence is pure good, and non-existence, pure evil 

89 

The  Fifth  Chapter  (of  the Twenty-Ninth Flash): Five ‘Points’ on the degrees of 
For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs! The original is in Arabic
 

91 

THE FIFTH RAY: (On the Signs of the End of Time)   97 

Introduction, consisting of five ‘Points’ 

98 

Second Station, consisting of twenty ‘Matters’ 

103 

Three Brief Matters complementing the above 

114 

THE SIXTH RAY: The answers to two questions about the formulas recited during 

the ‘tashahhud’ section of the ritual prayers (salat) 

118 

First  Question:  What  is  the  reason  for  the blessed phrases of the tashahhud being 

recited during the prayers? 

118 

Second  Question:  About  the  comparison  at  the  end  of  the  tashahhud  about 
Muhammad (PBUH) and Abraham (PUH). The answer contains three ‘Aspects’
  120 

THE SEVENTH RAY: The Supreme Sign 

123 

An Important Warning and Statement of Purpose 

123 

Introduction:  Two  abysses  that  shake  certainty  of faith this age, and the means of 

salvation from them  125 

The First Chapter: Concerning proofs of the Divine existence 

130 

The testimony of the heavens and all they contain 131 
The testimony of the atmosphere  131 
The testimony of the earth and its pages  135 
The testimony of the seas and rivers 
136 
The testimony of the mountains and plains 138 

 

8

The testimony of the trees and plants, including three truths 
The testimony of the  animal and bird realms, including three comprehensive truths

139 

The testimony of the realm of humanity: the prophets and               their unanimity

  140 

  141 

The testimony of the exacting scholars and their accord  142 
The testimony of the spiritual guides and their agreement 143 
The testimony of the angels and spirit beings and their concurrence 
The testimony of upright intellects and sound hearts 
The testimony of Divine revelation, which proclaims five truths  146 

145 

Two differences between revelation and inspiration 
The testimony and nature of inspiration in four ‘lights’ 
The testimony of Muhammad the Arabian Prophet (PBUH) 

148 
149 

Nine evidences of the veracity of his messengership 
Three forms of infallible consensus confirming him 

151 
155 

150 

The testimony of the Qur’an, and six ‘Points’ showing its greatness 
The testimony of the cosmos, through two vast truths 
First Truth: ‘Createdness’ and ‘contingency’  163 
Second Truth: Universal co-operation  165 

163 

144 

156 

The  testimony  of  the  ‘station’  of  direct  address  to  God  in  His  presence,  in  two 

‘Truths’  167 

First Truth: The continuous, wise, and imperious activity in the universe 
Second Truth: Divine discourse  170 

167 

Second Chapter: Concerning proofs of Divine unity 

172 

The First Stopping-Place, four sacred truths prevailing over the cosmos  172 

First Truth: Absolute Divinity  172 
Second Truth: Absolute Dominicality  173 
Third Truth:  Perfections 
Fourth Truth: Sovereignty 

173 
174 

The  Stopping-Place  of  God’s  deeds,  the  world  of  creation  and  origination,  five 

comprehensive truths  176 

First Truth: That of Grandeur and Sublimity 
Second Truth: The absoluteness of the dominical deeds 
Third Truth: The ease, speed, and order of creation 

176 

179 

177 

 

9

Fourth Truth: The points of unity and convergence in beings  183 
185 
Fifth Truth: The perfect order and regularity of the cosmos 

The Third Stopping-Place, illumined by four truths 

189 

First Truth: The Truth of Opening 
Second Truth: The Truth of Mercifulness 
Third Truth: The Truth of Disposing and Administering 
Fourth Truth: The Truth of Compassionateness and Bestowal of Provision  194 

192 

189 

190 

THE NINTH RAY: The first part of the Addendum to the Tenth Word, Resurrection 

On the Purpose of the Risale-i Nur 

200 

and the Hereafter 

201 

Introduction, consisting of two ‘Points’  203 

First Point: Four proofs demonstrating that belief in the hereafter is fundamental to 

the life of society and man’s personal life 

203 

Second  Point:  The  testimony  to  the  truth  of  resurrection  of  the  other  pillars  of 

belief 

205 

THE ELEVENTH RAY: The Fruits of Belief 

213 

The First Topic: One hour for God 

214 

The Third Topic: An instructive incident  219 

The Fourth Topic: The most pressing question 

223 

The Fifth Topic: Youth will depart 225 

A Summary of the Second Topic: How to be saved from the gallows of death   216 

The Sixth Topic: All the sciences speak of God and make known the Creator 

226 

The Seventh Topic: “Teach us also about the hereafter,” comprising the answers of 
the Divine Names, the angels, the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) and the Qur’an
  230 

A Summary of the Eighth Topic: A number of benefits of believing in the hereafter 

which look to man’s social and personal life 

242 

Proofs of bodily resurrection 
Two ‘Points’ about Hell  249 
About the phrase: ‘God is Most Great!’  253 

247 

The  Ninth  Topic:  The  pillars  and  truths  of  Islam are an indivisible whole, in three 

‘Points’  256 

 

10

The  Tenth  Topic:  A  Flower  of  Emirdağ.    An  extremely  powerful  reply  to 

objections raised about repetitions in the Qur’an 

262 

Conclusion, consisting of two ‘Additions’  272 

The Eleventh Topic: The fruits tasted in this world of belief in the angels 277 

Conclusion 286 
A Supplement to the Addendum of the Eleventh Topic 

289 

THE TWELFTH RAY: Part of Bediuzzaman Said Nursi’s defence speeches given in 

Denizli Court 

297 

THE THIRTEENTH RAY: The light-scattering letters Bediuzzaman Said Nursi sent 
his students while in Denizli Prison, which illustrate in brilliant fashion the great 
exertions of the Risale-i Nur 

318 

THE  FOURTEENTH  RAY:  Comprising  part  of  Bediuzzaman’s  defence  during his 
trial in Afyon Court, letters which he wrote to his fellow-prisoner students, and 
parts of his students’ defence speeches 370 

Bediuzzaman’s  defence  speeches  and  the  petitions he sent to the Appeal Court and 

The Sixteenth Letter: Included by Bediuzzaman in the Fourteenth Ray because of 

to the Government in Ankara  370 

its relevance to his defence 

457 

Letters  written  by  Bediuzzaman  to  his  students  while  in  Afyon  Prison  in  order  to 

console, enlighten, and guide them 

474 

Parts of the defence speeches given by some of the Risale-i Nur students during their 

trials in Afyon Court 

534 

THE FIFTEENTH RAY, The Shining Proof 

569 

First Station: Consisting of three ‘Parts’  569 

Part  One:    A  concise  summary  of  the  Twentieth  Letter  which  in  eleven  phrases 

about Divine Unity offers eleven proofs of the truths of belief 570 

Part Two: A  brief summary of Sura al-Fatiha. Allusions to the truths of belief and 

their proofs from the treasury of this sura, in nine ‘Phrases’  580 

Part Three: A brilliant explanation with proofs of the second part of the profession 
591 

of faith: “Muhammad is the Messenger of God,” in three ‘Indications’ 

Second Station 

604 

Three of the worlds the traveller through the universe visited,  

11

which  illustrate  the  comparison  of  the  people  of  belief  and  of  misguidance,  in
three ‘Examples’ 

604 

Seeking  knowledge  of  the  Creator  of  the  universe  through  three  of  His  ‘seven’

attributes, knowledge, will, and power  608 

The attribute of ‘knowledge’ as indicated by the words of the tashahhud in the five

daily prayers, together with eleven ‘Evidences’ 609 
The attribute of ‘will’; one universal proof of this 620 
The attribute of ‘power’; utterly convincing, irrefutable proofs in nine ‘Steps’  622
Introduction to the Turkish Translation of The Damascus Sermon  639 

THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE TWENTY-NINTH FLASH, On the phrase

‘All praise be to God!’ 

648 

676 

Note on the Turkish Alphabet 

[Not Included in this PDF]

A Brief Look at Bediuzzaman Said Nursi’s Life, the Risale-i Nur, and The Rays 

Collection 

677 

[Not Included in this PDF]

 

13

The Second Ray 

The Final Fruit of Eskisehir Prison 
The Second Ray of the Thirty-First Flash 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 

This  Ray  was  written  sixteen  years  ago  at  a  time  I  remained  alone  in 
Eskisehir  Prison  after  my  friends had been released.  It was written at great 
speed, with my own very deficient pen at a distressing, disagreeable time and 
is  therefore  somewhat  lacking  in  order.  Still,  I  saw  when  correcting  it 
recently  that  in  respect  of  belief  and  the  affirmation  of  Divine  Unity  it  is 
extremely valuable, powerful, and important. 
                                                         S a i d  N u r s i 

[This forms a seventh ‘Point’ about the six Greatest Names and is about the 
Greatest Name of ‘God, The One.’] 

NOTE 

In  my  view,  this  treatise  holds  great  importance,  for  the  significant  and  subtle 
mysteries of belief that it contains unfold and develop. One who reads and understands 
this treatise will save his belief, God willing. Unfortunately I have been unable to meet 
with anyone here and have been unable to write out a fair copy myself. If you want to 
understand the treatise’s value, read first of all the Second and Third Fruits of the First 
Station  carefully  and  the  Conclusion  at  the  end  and  the  matter  in  the  two  pages 
preceding that, then study the whole of it slowly!  

 

14

THE SEVENTH OF THE SIX POINTS ABOUT THE SIX 
GREATEST NAMES, ABOUT ‘GOD, THE ONE’ 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
And from Him do we seek help. 

Inspired by one splendid meaning of the verse, 
And know that there is no god but God,1 

and by a famous oath of the Prophet (PBUH), this treatise consists of a subtle point I 
perceived  about  three  beautifully  sweet  and  subtle  fruits  of  the  affirmation  of  Divine 
unity, and three matters necessitating it, and three proofs of it. 

The  oath  God’s  Most  Noble Messenger most frequently used was the oath: “By 
Him  in  whose  hand  is  Muhammad’s  being,”2  which  shows  that  even  the  furthermost 
tips of the tree of the universe, and its broadest extent, and its minor particulars, exist 
through  the  power  and  will  of  the  Single  One  of  Unity.  For  if  the  most  choice  and 
exceptional of creatures, Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), does not own 
himself,  and  if  he  is  not  free  to  act  as  he  wishes  and  is  tied  in his actions to another 
will,  certainly,  nothing,  no  function,  state  or  circumstance,  whether  particular  or 
universal, can be outside the power of that all-encompassing will. 

Yes,  what  this  meaningful  oath  of  Muhammad  (PBUH)  indicates  is  the  mighty, 
all-encompassing  unity  of  dominicality.  Since  a  hundred,  perhaps  a  thousand,  clear 
proofs of this Divine unity have been set forth and explained in the Risale-i Nur, which 
is the Siracü’n-Nur (The Illuminating Lamp),3 we refer to that the details and proofs 
of this elevated truth. In this Second Ray, in the first of three brief ‘Stations’ contained 
in this  

                                             

1 Qur’an, 47:19. 
2 Musnad, iv, 16. 
3 A collection from the Risale-i Nur consisting of A Supplication (Third Ray), Treatise For The 

Sick, Treatise For The Elderly, ‘For us God suffices’ (Fourth Ray), the Thirteenth Flash, Thirty-
Three Windows, A Supplication in Arabic, and the Denizli Defence Speeches. [Tr.] 

 

15

most  important  truth  of  belief,  three  subtle,  sweet,  precious,  and  luminous  universal 
fruits out of innumerable fruits will be explained in summary fashion, thereby alluding 
to the insights and experiences which impelled my heart to those fruits. 

In  the  Second  Station,  three  universal  matters  and  motives  necessitating  this 

sacred truth will be explained, which have the power of three thousand such matters. 

In  the  Third  Station,  three  signs  pointing  to  this  truth  of  Divine  unity  will  be 

mentioned, which have the power of three hundred signs, indications, and proofs. 

The First Fruit of the First Station 

In  Divine  unity  and  the  affirmation  of  it,  Divine beauty and dominical perfection 
become apparent. If there was no unity that pre-eternal treasury would remain hidden. 
Yes,  it  is  only  in  the  mirror  of  unity  and  in  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  Names 
concentrated by means of unity in the faces of particulars at the extremities of the tree 
of  creation  that  infinite  Divine  beauty  and  perfection,  unending  dominical  excellence 
and loveliness, the incalculable bounties and gifts of that Merciful One, and the utterly 
perfect beauty of that Eternally Besought One, are all to be seen.  

For  example,  when the particular act of sending  to the assistance of a powerless 
infant  lacking  will,  pure  white  milk  from  an  unexpected  place,  that  is,  from  between 
blood and excrement, is considered from the point of view of the affirmation of Divine 
unity, suddenly, through the wondrous, tender sustaining of all infants and young and 
their subjugating their mothers to themselves, the undying beauty of the mercy of the 
Most Merciful is seen in all its splendour. If not looked at through the eyes of Divine 
unity, that beauty is hidden, and that particular providing of sustenance is ascribed to 
causes,  chance,  and  Nature,  thus  losing  all  its  value  and  even  transforming  its  very 
nature. 

Also,  for  example;  if  being  healed  of  a  dreadful  disease  is  considered  from  the 
point of view of the affirmation of Divine unity, on the face of the bestowal of healing 
on  all  the  sick  in  the  huge  hospital  called  the  earth,  through  the  remedies  and 
medicines  from  the  vast  pharmacy  called  the  world,  the  beautiful  compassion  of  the 
Absolutely  Compassionate  One  and  the  acts  of  His  mercy  become  apparent  in 
universal  and  splendid  fashion.  If  it  is  not  considered  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
affirmation  of  Divine  unity,  that  particular  but  knowledgeable,  perceptive,  and 
conscious bestowal of healing will be attributed to the properties of lifeless medicines 
and to blind force and unconscious Nature; its nature will be completely changed and it 
will lose its wisdom and value.  

 

16

I am explaining here because of its relevance a point which occurs to me about a 
benediction for the Prophet (PBUH). It concerns the well-known benediction which is 
recited regularly by the Shafi‘i’s at the end of tesbihat following the five daily prayers: 
O God! Grant blessings to our master Muhammad and to the family of Muhammad, 
to  the  number  of  ills  and  their  remedies,  and  bless  him  and  them  and  grant  them 
unending peace. It is important because due to the wisdom in man’s creation and the 
mystery  of  his  comprehensiveness,  every  moment  he  entreats  his  Creator  and  seeks 
refuge  with  Him,  and  offers  Him  thanks  and  praise.  Just  as  illnesses  are  the  most 
effective  whip  driving  him  to  the  Divine  Court,  so  the  chief  of  the  sweet  bounties 
prompting  him  to  give  thanks  earnestly  and  to  truly  offer  praise  gratefully  are 
remedies,  healing,  and  good  health.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  this  benediction  is  most 
meaningful  and  widely  accepted.  Sometimes  when  reciting  “to  the  number  of  all  ills 
and  their  remedies,”  I  see  the  earth  in  the  form  of  a  hospital  and  sense  the  clearly 
obvious  existence  of the True  Healer, Who supplies the remedies for all ills, physical 
and  spiritual,  and  answers  all  needs,  and  His  universal  clemency  and  sacred  all-
embracing compassion. 

Also  for  example;  if  the  bestowal  of  guidance  and  belief  on  someone  who 
experiences  the  ghastly  pains  of  misguidance is  considered from the point of view of 
the affirmation of Divine unity, the pre-eternal beauty of One Munificent and Generous 
becomes apparent on the face of that supreme gift, which transforms the insignificant, 
transitory,  and  impotent  man  into  the  slave-addressee  of  the  One  True  Object  of 
Worship, the Creator and Sovereign of all the universe, and through his belief bestows 
on  him  —and  on  all  believers  according  to  their  degree—  eternal  happiness  and  a 
broad and splendid everlasting world and  property. One flash of that unfading beauty 
is such that it makes all believers love it, and the elite enamoured of it and captivated 
by  it.  If  such  an  event  is  not  considered  from  the  point  of  view  of  Divine  unity, the 
man’s particular belief will be attributed either to the person himself, as with the self-
centred and self-opinionated Mu‘tazilites, or to causes. Then that sparkling gem of the 
Most Merciful, the true price and value of which is Paradise, will be reduced to being a 
piece of glass and it will no longer reflect the flashes of that sacred beauty. 

Thus,  it  may  be  seen  from  these  three  examples that being concentrated in them 
through the affirmation of Divine unity, the innumerable sorts and varieties of Divine 
beauty and dominical perfection are apparent in the particular beings at the extremities 
of  the  sphere  of  multiplicity,  and  in  all  their  states  and  conditions,  and  the  certain 
existence of Divine beauty and perfection is understood and established. 

 

17

It  is  because  Divine  beauty  and  perfection  are  to  be  seen  with  the  heart  in  the 
affirmation  of  Divine  unity  and  perceived  by  the  spirit  that  all  the  saints and purified 
ones  have  found  their  sweetest  illuminations  and most delectable spiritual sustenance 
in  repeated  recitation  of  “There  is  no  god  but  God,”  the  profession  of  Divine  unity. 
And  it  is  because  Divine  grandeur  and  magnificence,  Divine  glory,  and  the  absolute 
sovereignty  of  the  dominicality  of  the  Eternally  Besoughted  One  are  realized  in  the 
profession of Divine unity that God’s Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon 
him) declared: “The best thing I and the prophets before me have said is ‘There is no 
god but God.’”4 

Yes, although a small bounty, gift and sustenance like a flower, a fruit, or a light, 
is a tiny mirror, through the mystery of Divine unity each suddenly stands shoulder to 
shoulder  and  joins  with  all  its  fellows.  Being  transformed  into  a  large  mirror,  its 
species  displays  the  sort  of  Divine  beauty  which  is  manifested  on  it.  With  transient, 
fleeting  beauty  it  points  to  an  everlasting,  undying  beauty.  As  Mawlana  Jalal  al-Din5 
said:  

The imagination which is the snare of the saints 
Is the reflection of the moon-faced beauties of the garden of God;  

it  becomes  a  mirror  to  Divine  beauty.  If  not  for  the  mystery  of  the  affirmation  of 
Divine  unity,  each  particular  fruit  would  remain  on  its  own,  and would show neither 
that  sacred  beauty  nor  its  elevated  perfection.  Even  the  particular  flash  of  beauty 
within it would be extinguished and vanish. It would quite simply become its opposite; 
from being a diamond, it would turn into glass. 

Also,  through  the  mystery  of  the  affirmation  of  Divine  unity,  in  living  beings, 
which  are  the  fruits  of  the  tree  of  creation,  is  a  Divine  personality,  a  dominical 
oneness,  an  immaterial  face  of  the  Most  Merciful  defined  by  the  seven  attributes,  a 
concentration  of  the  Names,  and  the  manifestation  of  the  determination  and 
personification of the One Who is addressed by the words “You alone do we worship 
and from You alone do we seek help.”6 Otherwise that personality, that oneness, that 
face,  the  manifestation  of  that  determination  would  expand  to  the  extent  of  the 
universe, disperse and be hidden. It would be seen only by eyes of the heart that were 
truly vast and comprehensive. For the magnificence of Divine grandeur would veil it; 
not everyone could see it with the eye of the heart. 

Also, it is clearly understood from those particular living beings that  

                                             

Jami’u’s-Saghir, no: 1113. 

4 Muwatta, Qur’an, 32; Hajj, 246; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 153; al-Albani, Sahih al-

5 Mawlana Jalal al-Din Rumi (604/1207-672/1273), author of the Mathnawi. 
6 Qur’an, 1:5. 

 

18

their Maker sees them, knows them, hears them, and does as He wishes. Quite simply, 
behind  the  createdness  of  each  living  being,  the  immaterial  personification  and 
determination  of  one  who  has  power  and  will,  hears,  sees  and  knows, is apparent to 
one who believes. 

Especially  behind  the  createdness  of  man  from  among  living  creatures,  through 
belief  and  through  the  mystery  of  Divine  unity,  that  immaterial  personification  and 
determination are to be observed in extremely clear fashion. For samples of meanings 
such  as  knowledge,  power,  life,  hearing,  and  sight,  which  are  the  bases  of  that 
personification  of  oneness,  are  present  in  man,  and  he  indicates  them  through  those 
samples. For example, the one who bestows the eyes, both sees the eye, and, a subtle 
meaning,  sees  what  the  eye  sees,  then  he  bestows  them.  For  sure,  the  oculist  who 
makes some spectacles for your eyes, sees that they are suitable for your eyes, then he 
makes them. And the one who bestows the ears, surely hears what the ears hear, then 
he  makes  them  and  bestows them. Examples for the other attributes may be made in 
the same way. 

Also, man bears the impresses and manifestations of the Names; through them, he 

testifies to those sacred meanings. 

Also,  through  his  weakness,  impotence,  poverty,  and  ignorance,  man  acts  as  a 
mirror in another way; he testifies to the power, knowledge, will, and other attributes 
of the one who has pity on his weakness and poverty, and comes to his aid. 

Thus,  since  through  the  mystery  of  Divine  unity,  a  thousand  and  one  Divine 
Names  are  concentrated  in  the  furthest  points  and  most  scattered  particulars  of  the 
sphere  of multiplicity, in the tiny missives known as living beings, and are to be read 
most clearly, the All-Wise Maker multiplies the copies of them extensively. He makes 
exceedingly  numerous  and  various  the  copies  of  the  species  of  small  living  beings  in 
particular, and publishes them everywhere. 

What  impelled  me  to  the  truth  of  this  First  Fruit  was  a  certain  feeling  and 

experience. It was like this: 

At  one  time, due to my excessive feelings of pity, sympathy and kindness, I was 
exceedingly  touched  and  sorry  for  living  beings,  and  of  them,  intelligent  beings  and 
man,  and  particularly  the  oppressed  and  disaster-stricken.  I  exclaimed  from  my  very 
heart: “Neither these monotonous laws which prevail over the world hear the woes of 
these powerless and weak unfortunates, nor do the overwhelming,  deaf elements and 
events  hear  them.  Is  there  no  one  who  will  take  pity  on  their  wretched  state  and 
intervene in their particular plights?” My spirit was crying out from its very depths. My 
heart called out with all its strength: “Do these fine crea 

 

19

tures,  these  valuable  goods,  these  yearning  and  grateful  friends,  have  no  owner,  no 
master,  no  true  friend  who  will  look  to  their  business,  accompany  them  and  protect 
them?” 

The satisfying, soothing, and sufficient answer to the cries of my spirit and tumult 
of  my  heart  was  this:  through  the  mystery  of  the  Qur’an  and  light  of  belief,  and the 
mystery of Divine unity, I perceived the particular favours and special assistance of the 
All-Glorious  One,  Who  is  All-Merciful  and  Compassionate,  above  the  law,  to  those 
lovable  creatures  who  weep  and  lament  under  the  pressure of universal laws and the 
assaults of events; and His particular dominicality towards everything directly; and the 
facts  that  He  Himself  directs  everything  personally  and  listens  to  the  plaints  of  all 
things;  and  that  He  is  the  true  owner,  protector,  and  master  of  everything.  I  felt  an 
infinite  joy  in  place  of  that  endless  despair.  Being  totally  owned  by  such  a  Glorious 
Owner, and being connected to Him, in my view all living beings gained in importance 
and value a thousand times over. 

For since everyone takes pride in his master’s honour and fame, and at the rank of 
the  person  to  whom  he  is  attached,  and  acquires  a  dignity,  through  the  unfolding  of 
this  relation  through  the  light  of  belief  and  the  state  of  being  owned,  and  due  to  its 
strength,  an  ant  vanquished  the  Pharaoh  and  could  feel  the  pride  of  a  thousand 
Pharaohs,  who  were  heedless,  imagined  themselves  to  be  independent  and  to  own 
themselves,  and  had  overweening  pride  —which  was  extinguished at the door of the 
grave— at their forefathers and the land of Egypt. And in the face of Nimrod’s pride, 
which  changed  into  torment  and  shame  when  he  tasted  the  pangs  of  death,  the  fly 
pointed to the pride of its own relationship, reducing Nimrod’s to nothing. 

The verse,  

To assign partners to God is verily a great transgression7  

states  that  to  associate  partners  with God  is  an  infinite  wrong. Assigning partners to 
God  is  a  vast  crime,  since  it  transgresses  the  rights,  honour,  and  dignity  of  all 
creatures. Only Hell can cleanse it. 

The Second Fruit of the Affirmation of Divine Unity 

The  First  Fruit  considered  the  Most  Pure  and  Holy  One,  the  Creator  of  the 
Universe, now this Second Fruit considers the universe and its essential nature. Yes, it 
is through the mystery of Divine unity that the perfections of the universe are realized; 
and the elevated duties of beings under 

                                             

7 Qur’an, 31:13. 

 

20

stood;  and  the  results  of  the  creation  of  beings  are  established;  and  the  value  of 
creatures  known;  and  the  Divine  purposes  in  the  world  find  existence;  and  the 
instances  of  wisdom  in  the  creation  of  living  beings  and  conscious  beings  become 
apparent;  and  behind  the  stern,  angry  faces  of  the  violent  storms  of  upheaval  and 
change  the  smiling, beautiful faces of mercy and wisdom are seen;  and  the numerous 
existences  of  transitory  beings  —such  as  their  results,  identities, true natures, spirits, 
and  glorifications,  which  they leave in their places in the Manifest World before they 
depart— are known.  

Furthermore,  it  is  only  through  the mystery of Divine unity that it is known that 
the  universe  as  a  whole  is  a  meaningful  book of the Eternally Besought One; and all 
beings  from  the  ground  to  the  Divine  Throne  are  a  miraculous  collection  of  Divine 
missives; and all the realms of creatures are a magnificent regular dominical army; and 
all  sorts  of  beings  from  microbes  and  ants  to  rhinoceroses,  eagles,  and  planets  are 
diligent  officials  of  the  Pre-Eternal  Sovereign;  and  since  they  act  as  mirrors  to  and 
have  a  relation  with  that  Sovereign,  the  value  of  all  things  infinitely  surpasses  their 
individual  value;  and  the  answers  are  revealed  of  the  unsolved,  abstruse  questions 
“Where do this flood of beings and these caravans of creatures come from? Where are 
they going? Why did they come? And what are they doing?” Otherwise, these elevated 
perfections of the universe would vanish, and those lofty, sacred truths be transformed 
into their opposites. 

It  is  because  the  crimes  of  ascribing  partners  to  God  and  disbelief  constitute 
aggression against all the universe’s perfections and its sacred truths and the elevated 
rights of beings, that the universe becomes angry at the disbelievers and idolators. The 
heavens  and  earth  become  wrathful,  and  the  elements  unite  to  destroy  them, 
overwhelming  and  submerging  those  who  ascribe  partners  to  God,  such  as  Noah’s 
people,  and  the  ‘Ad  and  Thamud  peoples,  and  the  Pharaoh.  In  accordance  with  the 
verse, 

Well-nigh bursting with fury,8 

Hell  so  rages  and  fumes  at  the  disbelievers  and  ascribers  of  partners  to  God  that  it 
almost  bursts  apart.  Yes,  to  associate  partners  with  God  is  a  terrible  insult  to  the 
universe  and  a  great  transgression  against  it.  By  denying  the  sacred  duties  of  beings 
and  the  purposes  of  their  creation,  it  insults  their  honour.  To  illustrate  this,  we  shall 
allude to one example out of thousands. 

For example, through the mystery of Divine unity the universe resem 

                                             

8 Qur’an, 67:8. 

 

21

bles  a  huge,  corporeal  angel;  glorifying  and  sanctifying  its  Maker  with  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  heads,  to  the  number  of  species  of  beings,  and  with  hundreds  of 
thousands of mouths, to the number of members of those species, and with hundreds 
of  thousands of tongues in every mouth, to the number of organs, parts, and cells of 
those members — a wondrous collection of elevated creatures engaged in worship like 
the  Angel  Israfil.  Through  the  mystery  of  Divine  unity, the universe  is also an arable 
field  yielding  copious  crops  for  the  worlds  and  dwelling-places  of  the  hereafter;  a 
factory producing numerous goods, such as human actions, for the levels of the Abode 
of  Bliss;  and  a  movie-camera  with  a  hundred  thousand  lenses  continuously  taking 
pictures of this world to show to the spectators in the eternal realm and especially in 
Paradise.  To  ascribe  partners  to  God  is  to  transform  this  truly  wondrous,  absolutely 
obedient,  living,  corporeal  angel  into  a  lifeless,  soulless,  unemployed,  perishing, 
meaningless, wretched, futile collectivity, revolving in the tumult of events and storms 
of change and darkness of non-existence; and to convert this strange, utterly orderly, 
beneficial  factory  into  an  idle,  confused,  unconscious  plaything  of  chance  which  is 
without  product  or  result  or  function;  to  make  it  into the playground of  deaf Nature 
and blind force, a place of mourning for all intelligent beings, and the slaughterhouse 
of all living creatures, and a vale of tears. 
In accordance with the verse,  

To assign partners to God is verily a great transgression,9 

to associate partners with God, although a single evil, leads to such vast and numerous 
crimes  that  those  who  perpetrate  it  deserve  infinite  torment  in  Hell.  Anyway...  since 
this Second Fruit has been explained and proved repeatedly in The Illuminating Lamp, 
we have cut short the long story here. 

A  strange feeling and perception which drove me to this Second Fruit. It was 

like this:  

One time when observing the season of spring, I saw that the successive caravans 
of  beings,  and  especially  living  creatures  and  the  small  young  ones  at  that,  which 
followed  on  one  after  the  other  and  in  a  flowing  torrent  displaying  hundreds  of 
thousands of samples of the resurrection of the dead and Great Gathering on the face 
of  the  earth,  appeared  only  briefly  then  disappeared.  The  tableaux  of  death  and 
transience  amid  that  constant,  awesome  activity  seemed  to  me  excessively  sad;  I  felt 
such pity it made me weep. The more I observed the deaths of those lovely small  

                                             

9 Qur’an, 31:13. 

 

22

creatures, the more my heart ached. I cried at the pity of it and within me felt a deep 
spiritual turmoil. Life which met with such an end seemed to me to be torment worse 
than death. 

The  living  beings  of  the  plant  and  animal  kingdoms,  too,  which  were  most 
beautiful and lovable and full of valuable art, opened their eyes for a moment onto the 
exhibition  of  the  universe,  then  disappeared  and  were  gone.  I  felt  grievous  pain  the 
more  I  watched  this.  My  heart  wanted  to weep  and  complain  and  cry  out  at  fate.  It 
asked the awesome questions: “Why do they come and then depart without stopping?” 
These  apparently  useless,  purposeless  little  creatures  were  being  despatched  to  non-
existence  before  my very eyes,  despite having been created, nurtured and raised with 
so much attention and art, in such valuable form. They were merely torn up like rags 
and thrown away into the obscurity of nothingness. The more I saw this the more my 
inner  senses  and  faculties,  which  are  captivated  by  beauty  and  perfection  and 
enamoured of precious things, cried out: “Why does no one take pity on them? Isn’t it 
a shame? Where did they come from, the death and ephemerality in these bewildering 
upheavals and transformations which persistently attack these wretched beings?” 

As I started to utter fearful objections about Divine Determining and the grievous 
circumstances  of  the  outer  face  of  life  and  its  events,  the  light  of  the  Qur’an,  the 
mystery of belief, the favour of the Most Merciful, and belief in Divine unity all came 
to  my  assistance.  They  lit  up  those  darknesses,  and  transformed  my  laments  into joy 
and  my  weeping  into  happiness  and  my  pity  into  exclamations  of  “Blessed  be  God! 
What wonders God has willed!” They caused me to declare: “All praise be to God for 
the  light  of  belief.”  For  through  the  mystery  of  Divine  unity  I  saw  that  all  creatures, 
and  particularly  living  creatures,  produce  truly  significant  results  and  have  general 
benefits. 

In  Short:  All  living  beings,  for  instance  this  adorned  flower  or  that  sweet-
producing  bee,  are  Divine  odes  full  of  meaning  which  innumerable  conscious  beings 
study  in  delight.  They  are  precious  miracles  of  power  and  proclamations  of  wisdom 
exhibiting  their  Maker’s  art  in  captivating  fashion  to  innumerable  appreciative 
observers.  While  to  appear  before  the  gaze  of  the  Glorious  Creator,  Who  wishes  to 
observe His art Himself, and look on the beauties of His creation and the loveliness of 
the  manifestations  of  His  Names,  is  another  exceedingly  elevated  result  of  their 
creation. 

A  further  elevated  function  of  their  creation  is  described  in  the  Twenty-Fourth 

Letter, and is their serving in five ways the manifestations  

 

23

of  dominicality  and  Divine  perfections  which  necessitate  the  infinite  activity  in  the 
universe. 

I  saw  that  if  it  is  a  being  with  a  spirit,  besides  benefits  and  results  such  as  the 
above,  since  it  leaves  behind  in  its  place  in  this  Manifest  World  its  spirit,  and  in 
innumerable  memories  and  other  ‘preserved  tablets’  its  form  and  identity,  and  in  its 
seeds the laws of its being and a sort of future life, and in the World of the Unseen and 
Realm  of  the Divine  Names the perfections and beauties it has mirrored, its apparent 
death has the meaning of a joyful release from duties; it merely passes behind a curtain 
of  death  and  is  hidden  from  worldly  eyes.  I  exclaimed:  “All  praise  and  thanks  be  to 
God!” 

These  genuine,  powerful,  faultless,  utterly  brilliant  instances  of  beauty  and 
loveliness which are visible in all the levels of the universe and all its realms of beings, 
and have spread everywhere, demonstrate with complete certainty that the ugly, harsh, 
abhorrent,  wretched  former  situation,  which  the  association  of  partners  with  God 
necessitates,  is  impossible  and  illusory.  For  such  ghastly  ugliness  could  not  exist 
hidden  under  the  veil  of  such  genuine  beauty.  If  it  was  found  there,  that  true  beauty 
would  be  untrue,  baseless,  futile,  and  illusory.  This  means  that  the  association  of 
partners with God has no reality, its way is closed, it has become stuck in a bog; what 
it  posits  is  impossible  and  precluded.  Since  this  truth  of  belief,  which  pertains  to the 
emotions,  is  explained  in  detail  with  numerous  proofs  in  many  parts  of  The 
Illuminating Lamp, we shall suffice here with this brief indication. 

Third Fruit 

This fruit looks to conscious beings, and particularly to man. Through the mystery 
of  Divine  unity,  among  all  creatures  man  may  attain  to  the  highest  perfections,  and 
become  the  most  valuable  fruit  of  the  universe,  the  most  perfect  and  refined  of 
creatures,  the  most  fortunate  and  happy  of  animate  beings,  and  the  addressee  and 
friend of the world’s Creator. Indeed, all man’s perfections and his lofty aims are tied 
to the affirmation of Divine unity and find existence through its meaning. For if there 
were no unity, man would be the most unhappy of creatures, the lowest of beings, the 
most  wretched  of  the  animals,  the  most  suffering and sorrowful of intelligent beings. 
For together with his infinite impotence, his innumerable enemies, his boundless want, 
and endless needs, he has been decked out with a great many faculties and senses, so 
that  he  feels  innumerable  sorts  of  pains  and  experiences  countless  sorts of pleasures. 
He has such aims and desires that one who does not govern the whole universe at once 
cannot bring about those desires. 

 

24

For  example,  man  has  an  intense  desire  for  immortality.  Only  one  who  has 
disposal over the whole universe as though it were a palace can answer this wish; who 
can close the door of this world and open that of the hereafter, like closing the door of 
one  room  and  opening  that  of  another.  Man  also  has  thousands  of  desires,  both 
negative  and  positive,  which  like  the  desire  for  immortality  spread  throughout  the 
world  and  stretch  to  eternity.  It  is  only the Single One, Who through the mystery of 
unity holds the whole universe in His grasp, that by answering these desires of man can 
cure the two awesome wounds of his impotence and want. 

Moreover,  man  has  wishes  for  tranquillity  and  ease  of  heart  so  insubstantial, 
secret,  and  particular,  and  aims  connected  with  the  immortality  and  happiness of  his 
spirit  so  vast,  comprehensive,  and  universal,  that  they  can  be  answered  only  by  one 
who  sees  the  subtlest  and  most  imperceptible  veils  of  his  heart,  and  is  not 
unconcerned,  and  hears  its  most  inaudible,  secret  voices,  and  does  not  leave  them 
unanswered.  That  one  must  also  have  sufficient  power  to  subjugate  the  heavens  and 
earth  as  though  they  were  two  obedient  soldiers,  and  make  them  perform  universal 
works. 

Also,  through  the  mystery  of  unity,  all  man’s  members  and  senses  gain  a  high 
value,  while  through  ascribing  partners  to  God  and  disbelief  they  fall  to  an  infinitely 
low  degree.  For  example,  man’s  most  valuable  faculty  is  intelligence.  Through  the 
mystery of Divine unity, it becomes a brilliant key to the sacred Divine treasuries, and 
to  the  thousands  of  coffers  of  the  universe.  Whereas  if  it  descends  to  associating 
partners  with  God  and  to  unbelief,  it  becomes  an  inauspicious  instrument  of  torture 
which heaps up in man’s head all the grievous pains of the past and awesome fears of 
the future. 

Also, for example, compassion, man’s most gentle and agreeable characteristic: if 
the  mystery  of  Divine  unity  does  not  come to its assistance, it becomes a calamitous 
torment which reduces man to the depths of misery. A heedless mother who imagines 
she has lost her only child for all eternity feels this searing pain to the full. 

Also,  for  example,  love,  man’s  sweetest,  most  pleasurable,  and  most  precious 
emotion:  if  the  mystery  of  Divine  unity  assists  it,  it gives  miniscule  man  the  expanse 
and breadth of the universe, and makes him a petted monarch of the animals. Whereas 
if  —I  seek  refuge  with  God—  man  descends  to  associating  partners  with  God  and 
unbelief, because he will be separated for all eternity from all his innumerable beloveds 
as  they  continuously  disappear  in  death,  love  becomes  a  terrible  calamity  constantly 
lacerating his wretched heart. But vain amusements causing heed 

 

25

lessness temporarily numb his senses, apparently not allowing him to feel it.  

If  you  make analogies with these three examples for man’s hundreds of faculties 
and senses, you will understand the degree to which Divine unity and the affirmation 
of it are the means by which he may be fulfilled and perfected.  Since this Third Fruit 
too has been very well explained in detailed manner with proofs in perhaps twenty of 
the treatises of The Illuminating Lamp, I am sufficing with this brief indication here. 

What impelled me to this Fruit was the following feeling: 

transience  and  ephemerality  with  all 

At one time I was on the top of a high mountain. Through a spiritual awakening 
powerful enough to dispel my heedlessness, death and the grave appeared to me in all 
their  stark  reality,  and 
their  painful 
representations.  Like  everyone’s,  my  innate  desire  for  immortality  surged  up  and 
rebelled against death. The fellow-feeling and compassion in my nature, too, revolted 
against  the  annihilation  of  the  people  of  perfection,  the  famous  prophets,  the  saints, 
and the purified ones, for whom I feel great love and attachment; it boiled up angrily 
against the grave. I looked in the six directions, seeking help, but I found no solace, no 
assistance. For looking to the past, I saw a vast graveyard; and to the future, darkness; 
and above I saw horror; and to the right and left, grievous situations and the assaults 
of  numberless  harmful  things.  Suddenly,  the  mystery  of  Divine  unity  came  to  my 
assistance and drew back the veil, revealing the face of reality. “Look!”, it said. 

First of all I looked at the face of death, which I feared greatly. I saw that for the 
people of belief it was a discharge from duties. The appointed hour was the discharge 
papers. It was a change of abode, the introduction to an everlasting life, and the door 
leading  to  it.  It  was  to  be  released  from  the  prison  of  this  world  and  to  fly  to  the 
gardens of Paradise. It was the occasion one enters the presence of the Most Merciful 
in order to receive the wages for one’s service. It was a call to go to the realm of bliss. 
Understanding this with complete certainty, I began to love death. 

I looked then at transience and ephemerality, and I saw them to be a pleasurable 
renewal,  like  pictures  on  the  cinema  screen  and  bubbles  on  flowing  water  under the 
sun.  Coming  from  the  World  of  the  Unseen  in  order  to  refresh  the  exquisite 
manifestations  of  the  Most  Beautiful  Names,  they  were  an  excursion,  a  trip,  in  the 
Manifest  World,  with  certain  duties  to  perform;  they  were  a  wise  and  purposeful 
manifestation  of  dominical  beauty;  they  performed  the  function  of  mirrors  to  the 
eternal beauty of beings. This I knew with certainty. 

 

26

I then looked at the six directions, and I saw that through the mystery of Divine 
unity they were so luminous they dazzled the eyes. I saw that the past was not a vast 
grave,  but  having  been  transformed  into  the  future,  had  become  thousands  of 
enlightened  gatherings  of  friends  and  thousands  of  light-filled  vistas.  I  looked  at  the 
true faces of thousands of matters like these two, and I saw that they afforded nothing 
but joy and thanks. 

I  have  described  my  feelings  about  this  Third  Fruit  with  proofs,  particular  and 
universal,  in  perhaps  forty  treatises  of  The  Illuminating  Lamp.  They  have  been 
explained so clearly and decisively in the thirteen ‘Hopes’ of the Twenty-Sixth Flash in 
particular,  the  Treatise  For  The  Elderly,  that  there  could  be  no  clearer  elucidation. 
Here I have therefore cut this very long story very short. 

 

27

Second Station 

 [There  are  incalculable  proofs  necessitating  in  absolutely  certain  form 
Divine  unity  and  the  affirmation  of  it,  which  neither  accept  nor  permit  the 
association of partners with God. Since hundreds, and perhaps thousands, of 
these are demonstrated in detail in the Risale-i Nur, here only three of them 
which necessitate Divine unity will be set out briefly.] 

The First 

According  to  the  testimony  of  the  wise  and  discerning  acts  which  are  to  be 
observed  in  the  universe,  creatures  are  made  through  the  limitless  attributes  and 
Names  of  an  All-Wise  Sovereign,  One  Perfect  and  Mighty  Whose  knowledge  and 
power are absolute. 

Yes, it may be surmised certainly from the works in the universe, that their Maker 
possesses  sovereignty  and  rulership  at  the  degree  of  absolute  dominicality,  and 
grandeur  and  magnificence  at  the  degree  of  absolute  might,  and  perfection  and  self-
sufficiency  at  the  degree  of  absolute  godhead;  and  that  His  activity  and  rule  are 
absolutely without restriction or limit; these are understood clearly, and are visible. As 
for 
absoluteness, 
perfection, 
comprehensiveness, unrestrictedness, and unlimitedness, they necessitate unity and are 
opposed to partnership. 

self-sufficiency, 

sovereignty, 

grandeur, 

The  testimony  to  unity  of  sovereignty  and  rulership:  This  has  been  proved 
with complete certainty in numerous places in the Risale-i Nur. A brief summary is as 
follows: 

The  mark  of  rulership  is  independence,  solitariness,  and  the  rejection  of 
interference; rulership necessitates these. Due to only a shadow of rulership, impotent 
men  even,  who  by  their  natures  are  in  need  of  assistance,  reject  the  interference  of 
others and preserve their independence. It is for this reason that there cannot be two 
kings  in  a  country,  or  two  governors  of  a  province,  two  mayors  of  a  town,  or  even 
two headmen of a village. If there are two of any of these, it leads to chaos; rebellions 
break  out  and  law  and  order  are  overturned.  Since  a  mere  shadow  of  rulership  in 
impotent men needy of assistance repels the partnership and interference of  

 

28

others  to  this  extent,  surely  the  rulership,  which  is  in  the  form  of dominicality, of an 
Absolutely  Powerful  One  free of all impotence will in no way accept any partners or 
interference. He will reject it vehemently and angrily repulse from His court those who 
ascribe imaginary partners to Him. The All-Wise Qur’an’s severe threats against those 
who ascribe partners to God arise from this truth. 

The  testimony  to  unity  of  grandeur,  magnificence,  and  glory:  This  too  has 
been explained with brilliant proofs in the Risale-i Nur, and here a very brief meaning 
of it is alluded to: 

For  example,  the  magnificence  and  grandeur  of the sun’s light leave no  need for 
any weak lights near to it, nor does its light allow any other light an effect. Similarly, 
the magnificence and immensity of Divine power leave no need for any other force or 
power,  and  afford  no  other  power  a  true  effect  or  ability  to  create.  Especially  living 
and  conscious  beings,  which  are  the  points  on  which  of all the dominical aims in the 
universe  turn  and  where  they  are  concentrated;  it  is  impossible  that  they  should  be 
referred  to  others.  It  is  also  in  no  way  possible  that  the  fruits,  results,  and 
circumstances  of  man’s  creation  and  of  living  beings,  which  are  the  origin  of 
innumerable  sorts  of  bounties  and  where  the  aims  of  their  creation  are  manifested, 
should  be  referred  to  other  hands.  For  example,  it  would  be  an  affront  to  the 
magnificence of dominicality for an animate being to be truly grateful to anyone other 
than Almighty God for being healed from some minor ailment, or for some sustenance, 
or  for  guidance,  and  to praise and applaud  the person extravagantly; the grandeur of 
the  Godhead  would  be  offended;  the  dignity  of  the  Absolute  Object  of  Worship 
affronted, and His glory, vexed. 

How  perfection  points  to  the mystery of unity: Again this  has been explained 
with  brilliant  proofs  in  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and an  extremely  brief  meaning  of it  is this: 
self-evidently,  the creation of the heavens and earth necessitate an absolute power of 
utter  perfection.  The  wondrous  bodily  systems  of  animate  beings  also  necessitate  a 
power  of  absolute  perfection.  And  the  perfection  of  an  absolute  power  which  is 
exempt  from  impotence  and  free of restriction necessitates unity. For to apply defect 
to  perfection  and  restrict  the  unrestricted,  and  to  make  infinity  finite,  and reduce the 
strongest power to the weakest impotence means making an infinite power finite with 
something finite at a time it is infinite, and this is utterly impossible in five ways. 

The  testimonies  to  unity  of  unrestrictedness,  comprehensiveness,  and 
infinity:  This  too  has  been  mentioned  in  detail  in  the  treatises  of  The  Illuminating 
Lamp. A summary of its meaning is as follows: since by  

 

29

spreading  pervasively  around  their  own  works,  the  acts  in  the  universe  all  show that 
they  are  comprehensive  and  unrestricted,  unlimited  and  absolute;  and  since  partners 
and  participation  place  a  restriction  on  the  comprehensiveness  and  unrestrictedness, 
and  limit  the  unlimitedness,  destroying  their  nature  and  reality;  most  certainly 
partnership  in  those  acts  which  are  absolute  and  comprehensive  is  impossible  and 
precluded.  Yes,  the  very nature  of  unrestrictedness  is  opposed  to  partnership,  for  its 
meaning,  even  in  finite,  material,  and  limited  things,  is  to  spread,  pervade,  and 
permeate everywhere. 

For  example,  if  air, light,  and  heat,  and  even  water,  manifested unrestrictedness, 
they  would  spread  everywhere.  Since  this  aspect  of  unrestrictedness  makes  physical 
and  limited  things  invasive,  even  if  they  are  particular,  surely  true,  universal 
unrestrictedness  would  afford  such  encompassment  and  pervasiveness  to  attributes 
that were both infinite, and free of matter, and unlimited, and free of defect, that there 
could be no possibility whatsoever of their accepting any partners or partnership. 

In  Short:  Both  the  sovereignty,  and  the  grandeur,  and  the  perfection,  and  the 
comprehensiveness,  and  the  unrestrictedness,  and  the  infinity  of  the  thousands  of 
general acts and the hundreds of Divine Names whose manifestations are to be seen in 
the universe are extremely powerful proofs of Divine unity and the affirmation of it. 

Also,  a  superior  force  wants  to  overrun  its  surroundings  in  order  to  become 
activated,  scattering  other  forces.  Similarly,  it  is  apparent  from  all  the  works  of 
dominicality and manifestations of the Names of the Godhead that their forces are so 
extraordinarily  overwhelming  that  if  it  were  not  for  general sovereignty and absolute 
justice, which prevent them, they would have overrun all beings. For example, is it at 
all possible that the universal power which creates all the poplar trees on the earth and 
administers  them,  should  not  take  under  its  control  the  individual  trees  like  walnut, 
apple,  and  apricot,  which  have  become  interspersed  among  the  poplars,  and  not 
regulate  them  and  dominate  them,  or  that  it  should  hand  them  over  to  other  forces? 
Yes,  in  all  species  of  creatures,  and  even  in  each  individual,  a  governing  force  and 
power  are  felt  which  clearly  have  the  capacity  to  overrun  the  whole  universe  and 
subjugate  all  beings.  Certainly,  such  a  power  would  not  accept  partners  of  any  sort, 
nor permit partnership. 

Also, for the owner of a fruit-bearing tree, the matter of greatest importance is the 
fruit at the tips of the tree’s branches, and for future planting, the seeds in the hearts of 
its  fruits,  rather  that  are  the  hearts  of  its  fruits. If the tree’s owner has any sense, he 
will not make his ownership go for nothing by handing over the fruits to someone else. 
In exactly the  

 

30

same way; the elements, which are the branches of the tree called the universe, and the 
plants and animals, which are at the tips of the elements and are like the flowers and 
leaves of the tree, and human beings, which are the topmost of the leaves and flowers, 
—the owner  of  the  tree  would  in  no way hand over to other forces the worship and 
thanks  of  those  fruits,  which  are  their  most  important  fruits  and  the  result  of  their 
creation, and especially their hearts, the all-encompassing seeds of the fruits, and their 
faculties of memory, which are known as the ‘outer heart,’ so negating the sovereignty 
of His dominicality, and cancelling also his fitness to be worshipped. 

Also, since the aims of dominicality are centred in the particulars at the extremities 
of the sphere of contingency and multiplicity, and even in the states and circumstances 
of  those  particulars;  and  since  they  are  the  source  of  the  thanks,  gratitude,  and 
worship, which are extended and look to the One True Object of Worship; for sure He 
would not hand them over to others and so nullify His wisdom, and by nullifying His 
wisdom, annul His Godhead. For the most important dominical aim in the creation of 
beings  is  to  make  Himself  known  to  conscious  beings,  and  loved,  and  praised  and 
extolled, and to attract their gratitude to Himself. 

It is because of this subtle mystery that, in order to demonstrate that the bounties 
and acts, universal and particular, at the extremities of the sphere of multiplicity, like 
sustenance,  healing,  and  particularly  guidance  and  belief,  which  result  in  thanks, 
worship,  gratitude,  love,  praise,  and  worship,  are  directly  the  works,  bounties,  gifts, 
and  acts  of  the  universe’s  Creator,  the  Monarch  of  all  beings,  the  Qur’an  of 
Miraculous  Exposition  repeatedly  ascribes  sustenance,  guidance,  and  healing  to  the 
Necessarily Existent One, stating that the bestowal of them is His alone and restricted 
to Him, and strongly rejecting the interference of others.10 Yes, the One Who bestows 
the bounty of belief, which wins for a person an abode of bliss, can surely only be the 
One Who creates the abode of bliss and makes belief the key to it. It could only be His 
bounty.  Nobody  could  shut  up  this  largest  window  opening  onto  the  True  Object  of 
Worship  by  bestowing  an  equally  great  bounty;  no  one  could  block  up  this  most 
important means to Him, or steal it. 

In Short: The most particular events and fruits at the tips of the tree of creation 

testify to Divine unity and the affirmation of it in two ways: 

Firstly:  The  aims  of  dominicality  in  the  universe  are  gathered  together  in  those 
fruits and events and their aims are centred on them, and most of the manifestations of 
the Divine Names and their determinations, and the  

                                             

10 For example, God is the Provider, the firm possessor of strength (Qur’an, 51:58). 

 

31

results  of and benefits in the creation of beings are gathered together in them. In this 
respect, each of them therefore declares: “I am the property, act, and work of the One 
Who created the whole universe.” 

The  Second  Way:  Since  the  hearts  of  those  particular  fruits,  as  well  as  man’s 
memory,  which  in  a  Hadith  is  called  “the  outer heart,”11 are concise indexes of most 
species of beings, and small maps of them, and bear the meaning of seeds of the tree of 
the universe, and are subtle mirrors of most of the Divine Names; and since hearts and 
memories,  which  are  all  similar  and  bear  the  same  stamp,  spread  pervasively 
throughout  the  universe;  they  look  to  the  One  who  holds  the  whole  universe  in  the 
grasp of His power, and they each declare: “I am the work and art of Him alone.” 

To  Conclude:  With  regard to its benefits, a fruit  looks to its tree’s owner.  With 
regard to its seed, it looks to all the parts, members, and nature of the tree. And with 
regard to the stamp on its face, it gazes on all the fruits of the tree, whose stamp is the 
same. Together they declare: “We are all the same and we have one maker. We are the 
property of a single person. Whoever made one of us, made all of us.” In exactly the 
same way, in regard to the stamps on the faces of the living creatures at the extremities 
of  the  sphere  of  multiplicity,  and  especially  the  stamps on man’s face, and his index-
like heart, and the results of his nature and his being a fruit, they look directly to the 
One Who holds the whole universe in the grasp of His power, and testify to His unity. 

The Second Matter Necessitating Divine Unity 

This  is  the  fact  that  in  unity  are  an  ease  and  facility  which  render  it  necessary, 
while  in  associating  partners  with  God  are  difficulties  to  the  point  of  its  being 
impossible. This truth has been explained and demonstrated with brilliant and decisive 
proofs  in  many  of  the  treatises  of  what  Imam  ‘Ali  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him) 
called The Illuminating Lamp, especially in the Twentieth Letter, in detail, and in the 
Fourth  Point  of  the  Thirtieth  Flash,  briefly.  It  has  been  demonstrated  with  most 
powerful  proofs  that  if  all  things  are  attributed  to  one  single  Being,  the creation and 
regulation of the universe are as easy as the creation and regulation of a tree; and the 
creation and making of a tree are as easy as the creation and making of a fruit; and the 
origination  and  management  of  the  spring  are  as  easy  as  the  origination  and 
management  of  a  flower;  and  the  admininstration  and  raising  of  a  species  containing 
numerous members are as free of trouble as the administration and raising of a single 
individual. 

Whereas if, on the way of associating partners with God, all things are  

                                             

11 Bukhari, al-Mu’sir, v, 237; al-Nikah, vii, 8; al-Nasa’i, al-Nikah. 

 

32

ascribed to causes and nature, the creation of a single individual is as difficult as that of 
a species, indeed, of many species; and the creation and decking out of a single living 
flower as difficult as the creation and decking out of the spring, or many springs; and 
the creation, making, raising to life, administering, nurturing, directing, and regulation 
of a tree as difficult as those of the universe, or even more difficult. 

Since  the  reality  of  the  matter  has  been  thus  proved  in  The  Illuminating  Lamp, 
and since as we see plainly before us, together with the very highest degree of art and 
the  greatest  value  there  is  a  superabundance  of  beings;  and  together  with  being 
wondrous  machines  with  numerous  miraculous  components  and  members,  all  living 
creatures come into existence in absolute profusion infinitely easily with extraordinary 
speed just like striking a match; it demonstrates necessarily and self-evidently that the 
profusion and ease arise from unity and from their being the works of a single Being. 
Otherwise, it would not be cheapness, abundance, speed, ease, and value; a fruit that is 
now obtained for five para would not have been obtainable for five hundred lira,12 or 
would  have  been  so  rare  as  to  have  been  unobtainable.  And  the  creation  of  living 
beings,  which  resemble  regular machines that work like setting  a clock or turning on 
an electric switch, would have been so difficult as to have been impossible, and some 
animals  who  come  into  existence  together  with  all  their  bodily  systems  and  vital 
conditions in a day, or an hour, or a minute, would not have come into existence in a 
year, or a century, or perhaps ever at all. 

It  is  proved  in  a  hundred  places  in  The  Illuminating  Lamp,  so  decisively  as  to 
silence  the  most  obdurate  denier,  that  if  all  things  are  ascribed  to  the  Single  One  of 
Unity,  they  are  as  easy,  swift,  and  cheap  as  a  single  thing.  Whereas  if  causes  and 
nature  are  given  a  share  as  well,  the  creation  of  a  single  thing  becomes  as  difficult, 
slow,  unimportant,  and  expensive  as  all  things.  If  you  want  to  see  the  proofs  of  this 
truth,  you  may  refer  to  the  Twentieth  and  Thirty-Third  Letters,  the  Twenty-Second 
and  Thirty-Second  Words,  the  Twenty-Third  Flash,  which  is  about  nature,  and  the 
Thirtieth  Flash,  which  is  about  the  Greatest  Name,  particularly  its  Fourth  and  Sixth 
Points  which  are  about  the  Names  of  Single  and  Self-Subsistent  respectively.  There 
you will see that it has been proved with the certainty of two plus two equalling four. 
Here, only one of those hundreds of proofs will be alluded to, as follows: 

The  creation  of  things  is  either  from  non-existence,  or  from  the  elements  and 
other beings in the form of composition. If attributed to a single Being, that Being is 
bound to have all-encompassing knowledge and  

                                             

12 4 para = 1 qurush, 100 qurush = 1 lira. [Tr.] 

 

33

power  that  prevails  over  all  things.  In  this  way,  the  giving  of  external  existence  to 
things  whose  forms  are  present  in  His  knowledge  or  who  exist  as  knowledge,  and 
bringing them out of apparent non-existence, is as easy and simple as striking a match 
or spreading a special liquid over invisible writing in order to reveal it, or transposing 
an  image  from  photographic  film  to  paper.  Through  the  ‘command  of  “Be!”  and  it 
is,’13  the  Maker  brings  into  external  existence  from  apparent  non-existence  things 
whose plans, programmes, and shapes and proportions are present in His knowledge. 

If it is in the form of composition and art, and not creating from non-existence and 
nothing, and in the form of gathering together from the elements and surroundings, it 
resembles  the  members  of  a  regiment  mustering  at  the  call  of  a  bugle  after  having 
dispersed  to  rest,  and  the  soldiers  collecting  together  in  regular  and  orderly  fashion, 
and  in  order  to  facilitate  this  exercise  and  preserve  their  positions,  the  whole  army 
being  like  the  power,  law,  and  eye  of  its  commander.  In  exactly  the  same  way,  as 
though  they  were  the  power,  law,  and  officials  of  the  Monarch  of  the  Universe, the 
minute particles under the command of that Monarch —together with the beings with 
whom they have contact— are mobilized according to the principles of His knowledge 
and determining and the laws of His pervasive power. In order to form a living being, 
they assume a specified measure and proportion, which resembles an immaterial mould 
specified by Divine knowledge and determining, and there they stop.  

If things are referred to different hands and causes, and to nature, then as all the 
reasonable agree, no cause can in any way create from nothing and non-existence. For 
causes  do  not  possess  comprehensive  knowledge  and  all-pervading  power,  and  non-
existence would not be only apparent and external, it would be absolute. And absolute 
non-existence can in no way be the source of existence. It which case, creation would 
be in the form of composition. But if in the form of composition, the particles of a fly 
or a flower could come together only with innumerable difficulties after collecting the 
body of a fly and parts of a flower from all over the earth and passing them through a 
fine  sieve.  Even  having  come  together,  since  there  would  be  no  immaterial  moulds 
existing  as  knowledge  to  preserve  them  in  orderly  form  without dispersing, physical, 
natural moulds, in fact moulds to the number of their members, would be necessary so 
that  the  particles  that  had  come  together  could  form  the  bodies  of  those  living 
creatures. 

                                             

13 Qur’an, 36:82. 

 

34

Thus, the ascribing of all things to a single Being is so easy as to be necessary and 
the  attributing  of  them  to  numerous  causes  so  difficult  as  to  be  impossible  and 
precluded. Similarly, if all things are ascribed to the Single One of Unity, they become 
valuable, full of art, meaningful, and powerful to the utmost degree at the same time as 
being infinitely cheap. While if, on the way of associating partners with God, they are 
ascribed to numerous causes and nature, they become valueless and completely lacking 
in art, meaning, and power, as well as being infinitely expensive. 

For  since  a  man  who  joins  the  army  becomes  connected  with its commander-in-
chief  and  he  relies  on  him,  he  gains  the  potential  moral  support  of  the  army,  if  it  is 
necessary. And since the power of the army is his reserve force, he acquires a physical 
strength  far  exceeding  his  individual  strength.  And  since  because  the  army  carries 
them, he is not compelled to carry the sources of that significant strength of his and his 
ammunition,  he  will  be  able  to  carry  out  superhuman  works.  Despite  being  a  single 
private soldier, he may capture an enemy field-marshal, or compel all the inhabitants of 
a town to migrate, or capture a citadel. His works will be extraordinary and of great 
worth. 

If,  however,  he  leaves  the  army  and  remains  on  his  own,  he  will  lose  that 
miraculous moral strength, power, and force, and be able to perform only insignificant, 
valueless  works  in  accordance  with  his  personal  strength  like  a  common  irregular 
soldier. His achievements will diminish proportionately. 

In  exactly  the  same  way,  since  on  the  way  of  Divine  unity  everything  becomes 
connected  with  the  All-Powerful  One  of  Glory  and  relies  on  Him,  an ant  may defeat 
the Pharaoh, a fly vanquish Nimrod, and a microbe subdue a tyrant. So too a seed the 
size of a fingernail may bear on its shoulders a tree the size of a mountain, and be the 
source  of  all  the  tree’s  parts  and  members  and  their  workbench.  All  particles,  too, 
through that connection and reliance, may perform innumerable duties in the formation 
of bodies, which are of innumerable sorts and arts. The works in which those miniscule 
officials and tiny soldiers are employed are infinitely perfect and of the highest art and 
value.  For  the  one who  makes  them  is  the  All-Powerful  One  of  Glory; it is He Who 
put  the  works  in  their  hands,  making  them  a  veil. Whereas if attributed to causes on 
the  way  of  associating  partners  with  God,  the  works  of  the  ant  would  have  been  as 
insignificant  as  the  ant,  not  an  atom’s  worth  of  value  would  have  remained  in  the 
particle’s art, and everything would have lost all value both in meaning and physically 
so that no one would give a farthing for the vast world. 

Since the reality is this; and since as we see with our own eyes every 

 

35

thing  is  infinitely  valuable,  and  full  of  art,  and  meaningful,  and  powerful;  most 
definitely  there  can  be  no  way  other  than  the  way  of  Divine  unity.  If  there  was,  it 
would be necessary to change all beings, empty the world into non-existence, and then 
refill  it  with  meaningless  junk,  so  that  a  way  could  be  opened  up  to  associating 
partners with God. 

So  now  you  have  heard  a  brief  summary  of  only  one  of  the  hundreds  of  proofs 
which elucidate the affirmation of Divine unity in the Risale-i Nur, which in the words 
of  Imam  ‘Ali  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him)  is  Siracü’n-Nur  (The  Illuminating 
Lamp) and Siracü’s-Sürc. You may make analogies with this for the others. 

The Third Matter Necessitating Divine Unity 

Since,  together  with  the  extraordinary  art  in  the  creation  of  things,  especially  in 
living beings, a seed is a small sample of the fruit, a fruit is a miniature specimen of the 
tree, a tree is a summary index of the species, and the species is a concise map of the 
universe and in meaning is its seed, and each of these is a comprehensive point and a 
droplet gathered together and distilled from the universe according to the principles of 
knowledge and balances of wisdom; the one who created any one of them must be the 
one who created the whole universe. Yes, the one who creates the seed of a melon is 
self-evidently  he  who created the melon; it is impossible and precluded that it should 
be anyone other than him. 

Yes,  we  look  and  see  that  all  the  atoms  in  blood  are  so  orderly  and  perform  so 
many duties that they are not inferior to the stars. All the red and white corpuscles in 
blood  work  with  such  a  degree  of  consciousness  in  protecting  and  feeding  the  body 
that they are more efficient than the best commissaries or bodyguards. All the cells of 
the  body  manifest  such  orderly  processes  and  incomings  and  outgoings  that  their 
administration is more perfect than the best-run body or palace. All plants and animals 
bear  such  a  seal  on  their  faces  and  such  machines  in  their  chests  that  only  one  who 
created all of them could situate those seals and machines in their places. And all the 
species of living beings have spread over the face of the earth in such orderly fashion 
and  have  intermingled with  the  other  species  having  mutual relations with them, that 
one  who  could  not  simultaneously  create,  administer,  regulate,  and  raise  all  those 
species,  and  not  place  that  veil  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  not  weave  that  most 
ornate,  artistic,  living  tapestry  with  its  warp  and  weft  of  the  four  hundred  thousand 
plant  and  animal  species  —  one  that  could  not  do  all  these  could  not  create  and 
administer a single species. If analogies are made with these for other things, it will be 
understood  that  in  respect  of  creation  and  bringing  into  existence,  the  universe  is  a 
whole that may not be split up  

 

36

into parts, and in respect of dominicality and management is a universal whose division 
is impossible. 

This  third  necessitating  factor  has  been  explained  and  proved  decisively  and 
brilliantly in many of the treatises of The Illuminating Lamp, and especially in the First 
Stopping Place of the Thirty-Second Word, demonstrating that like reflections of the 
sun,  a  proof  of  unity  and  its  affirmation  is  reflected  and  represented  in  everything’s 
mirror. Making do with those explanations, we are here cutting a long story short. 

 

37

Third Station 

 [In this station three universal signs of the affirmation of Divine unity will 
be explained.] 

The signs, proofs, and evidences of Divine unity are incalculable. Since thousands 
of them have been explained in detail in The Illuminating Lamp, in this Third Station 
three universal proofs are set forth briefly. 

The First Sign and Proof 

The  phrase  “He  is  One”  is  the  conclusion  of this. There is a unity in  everything, 
and unity points to one. Yes, a work that has unity self-evidently proceeded from one 
maker.  One  proceeds  from  one.  The  fact  that  there  is  a  unity  in  everything 
demonstrates  that  they  are  the  works  and  artefacts  of  a single being. The universe is 
like  a  rosebud swathed  in  a  thousand  veils of unity. Or it is a single macroanthropos 
dressed in unities to the number of Divine Names and universal Divine works. Or it is 
a  Tuba-tree  of  creation  on  the  branches  of  which  are  hung  unities  to  the  number  of 
realms of creatures. 

Yes,  the  administration of the universe is one and the same; and its regulation is 
one and the same; its sovereignty is one and the same; its stamp is one and the same; a 
thousand and one things are all one and the same. Also, although the Names and acts 
which make the universe turn are one and the same, they each encompass the universe, 
or  most  of  it.  That  is  to  say,  the  wisdom  that  works  in  it  is  one  and  the  same;  the 
bestowal in it is one and the same; its regulation is one and the same; the providing of 
sustenance in it is one and the same; the mercy which hastens to assist the needy is one 
and  the  same;  the  rain,  which  is  that mercy’s dispenser of soft drinks, is  one and the 
same, and so on; thousands of things are all one and the same. The sun, the universe’s 
stove, is one and the same;  the moon, its lamp, is one  and the same; fire, its cook, is 
one  and  the  same;  its  mountains,  which  are  its  stores,  treasuries,  and  masts,  are  one 
and  same;  its  water  dispensers  are  one  and  the  same;  its  sponges  which  water  the 
gardens are one and the same; a thousand and one things are all one and the same. 

 

38

All  these  instances  of  unity  in  the  world  are  proofs  indicating  the  Single  One  of 
Unity, as clear and brilliant as the sun. Moreover, the elements and realms of beings of 
the  universe  each  encompassing  the  face  of  the  earth,  as  well  as  being  one  and  the 
same,  and  their  interpenetration  and  their  uniting  through  their  mutual  relations  and 
even mutual assistance, are clear signs that their Owner, Maker, and Master is one and 
the same. 

The Second Sign and Proof 

The conclusion of this is the phrase “He has no partners.” It is the fact that there 
is a faultless, perfect order in everything in the universe, from minute particles to the 
stars,  and  an  utterly  beautiful  harmony  that  is  free  of  defect,  and  a  just  balance  that 
wrongs  nothing.  Perfect  order  and  balanced  harmony  can  occur  only  through  unity. 
For numerous hands interfering in a single work cause only confusion.  

Come  now  and  behold  the  magnificence  of  this  order:  it  has  made  the  universe 
into  a  splendid  mansion  every  stone  of  which  is  as  full  of  art  as  a palace;  and  into a 
magnificent  city  whose  endless  incomings  and  outgoings,  and  boundless  valuable 
goods  and  foods,  arrive  perfectly  regularly at exactly the right time from unexpected 
places,  from  behind  the  veil  of  the  Unseen.  The  order  has  also  transformed  the 
universe into a miraculous book so full of meaning that each of its letters expresses the 
meanings of a hundred lines, and each of its lines the meanings of a hundred pages, and 
each  of  its  pages  the  meanings  of  a  hundred  chapters,  and  each  of  its  chapters  the 
meanings  of  a  hundred  books.  Moreover,  all  its  chapters,  pages,  lines,  words,  and 
letters look to each other and allude to each other. 

Now  come  and  look  at  the  perfect  ordering  within  this  wondrous  order:  it  has 
made the vast universe as clean as a modern city; or made it into a fine palace which is 
constantly  swept  and  polished;  or  a  houri  of  Paradise  wearing  seventy  ornamented 
garments  one  on  top  of  the  other;  or  an  immaculate  rosebud  enwrapped  in  seventy 
delicate, ornamented petals.  

that  are  visible  only  on  a 

Now  come  and  consider  the  perfect  justice  of  the  balance  within  the  order  and 
cleanliness;  microscopic  organisms 
thousandfold 
magnification  are  weighed  up  on  those  scales  and  balances  together  with  suns  and 
stars a thousand times larger than the earth, and all are given their necessities without 
deficiency.  Those  minute  creatures  and  those  vast  beings  stand  shoulder  to  shoulder 
before the scales of justice, despite there being among the large ones some that if they 
were to lose their balance even for a split second, it would destroy the equilibrium of 
the world and doomsday would occur. 

 

39

Now  come  and  behold  the  wondrously  attractive  beauty  within  the  order, 
cleanliness,  and  balance;  it  has  made  the  vast  universe  into  a  splendid  festival,  an 
exhibition  of  highly  decorated  works,  and  a  springtime  with  freshly  opened  flowers. 
The  vast  spring  too  it  has  made  into  a  beautiful  flower-pot  and  gorgeous  bunch  of 
blooms, and to each spring it has given the form of a magnificent flower with hundreds 
of thousands of adornments which opens every season on the face of the earth. All the 
flowers of the spring it has beautified with every sort of decoration. Yes, through the 
beautiful  manifestations  of  the  Most  Beautiful  Names,  which  possess  the  utmost 
beauty and loveliness, all the realms of beings in the universe, and all the members of 
each,  manifest  such  beauty  according  to  their  capacities  that  Hujjat  al-Islam  Imam 
Ghazali  said:  “There  can  be  nothing  better  or  more  beautiful  than  what  exists  in  the 
sphere  of  contingency.”  Thus, this all-encompassing, captivating beauty, and general, 
wondrous  cleanliness,  and  all-pervasive,  exceedingly  sensitive  balance,  and 
comprehensive and in every way miraculous order and harmony, are such proofs and 
signs of Divine unity that they are clearer and more brilliant than the light that indicates 
the sun at noon. 

[There  follows  a  very  concise  yet  powerful  reply  to  a  two-part  question 
related to this Station.] 

The First Part of the Question: You are saying in this Station that beauty, good, 
and  justice encompass the universe, so what do you say to all the ugliness, disasters, 
illness, tribulations, and death we see around us? 

The Answer: A single instance of ugliness which results in or shows up numerous 
instances  of  beauty  is  indirectly  an  instance  of  beauty.  While  the non-existence of an 
ugliness, or its being invisible, which then conceals numerous instances of beauty and 
does not permit them to be seen, is not a single, but a manifold, ugliness. For example, 
if an ugliness which is a unit of measurement is non-existent, the beauty would be of 
only one sort, and its numerous degrees would remain concealed. For it is through the 
intervention of ugliness that the degrees of beauty unfold. Just as the degrees of heat 
become  apparent  through  the  existence  of  cold,  and  the  degrees  of  light  are  known 
through  darkness,  so  universal  instances  of  good,  universal  benefits,  universal 
bounties,  and  universal  instances  of  beauty  become  apparent  through  there  being 
minor instances of evil, harm, calamities and ugliness. This means that the creation of 
ugliness is not ugly, it is beautiful, because the majority of its results are beautiful. Yes, 
a lazy man who suffers loss due to the rain, cannot deny the good results it produces in 
the name of mercy; he cannot transform the mercy into harm. 

 

40

As  for  transience  and  death,  it  is  demonstrated  with  extremely  powerful  and 
decisive  proofs  in  the  Twenty-Fourth  Letter  that  they  are  not  contrary  to  general 
mercy, all-embracing beauty, and comprehensive good; in fact, they are necessitated by 
them.  The  creation  of  Satan,  even,  since  he  is  the  cause  of  striving  and competition, 
the springs of man’s spiritual progress, is also good,  as is  the creation of his species; 
their  creation  is  beautiful  in  that  respect.  Also,  for  unbelievers  to  suffer  torments  in 
Hell even is good, since through their unbelief they have transgressed the rights of all 
beings  and  insulted  their  honour.  These  two  points  have  been  explained  in  detail  in 
other treatises, so here we are curtailing the discussion with this brief indication. 

The Second Part of the Question:14 Alright, so we can accept the answer about 
Satan  and  the  unbelievers  from  a  general  point  of  view,  but  how  is  it  that  the 
Absolutely  Beautiful  One,  the  Absolutely  Compassionate  One,  the  Absolutely  Self-
Sufficient  One,  Who  is  absolute  good,  inflicts  evil,  calamities,  and  ugliness  on 
particular wretched individuals? 

The  Answer:  Whatever  good,  beauty,  and  bounty  there  are,  they  come  directly 
from the treasury of mercy of that Absolutely Beautiful and Compassionate One, and 
from  His  particular  bestowal.  Evils  and  calamities  on  the  other  hand  are  occasional 
results  out  of  the  many  results  of  the  general,  universal  laws  which  are  called  ‘adat 
Allah  and  represent  His  universal  will.  Since  they  are  minor  and  required  by  those 
laws, He creates them in order to preserve and maintain the laws, which are the means 
to  universal  benefits.  But  in  the  face  of  those  minor,  grievous  results,  He  responds 
with special, merciful assistance and particular dominical favours to the cries for help 
of individuals afflicted by misfortune and tribulations. And by showing that He acts as 
He wishes, and that all aspects of all things are tied to His will, and that universal laws 
too  are  always  subject  to  His  will  and  choice,  and  that  a  Compassionate  Sustainer 
heeds  the  individuals  who  cry  out  at  the constraint of the laws and responds to their 
cries for help with His favours, through exceptions to those universal Divine principles 
and  general  laws  and  their  minor  evil  results  and  His  particular  favours  and  making 
Himself  loved  in  special  ways,  He  opens  up  an  unrestricted  infinite  field  for  the 
unrestricted  infinite  manifestations  of  His  Names,  and  opens  too  the  doors  of 
particular manifestations.  

This second sign of the affirmation of Divine unity has been elucidated in perhaps 

a hundred places in The Illuminating Lamp, and here we suffice with a brief hint to it. 

                                             

14 The answer to the second part of the question has great importance; it dispels numerous 

doubts. 

 

41

The Third Sign and Proof 

This consists of the innumerable stamps of Divine unity alluded to by the phrases 
“His  is  the  dominion  and  His  is  the  praise.”  Just  as  the  manifestation  of  the  sun in a 
mirror  shows  the  sun,  so  on  the  faces  of  all  things,  whether  particular  or  universal 
from minute particles to the planets, is a mirror-like stamp which, pointing to the Sun 
of Pre-Eternity and Post-Eternity, testifies to His unity. Since a great number of those 
stamps  have  been  described  in  detail  in  The  Illuminating  Lamp,  here  with  a  brief 
indication, we shall take a look at only three of them. As follows: 

Just  as  on  the  face  of  the  universe  as  a  whole  a  large  stamp  of  unity  has  been 
placed  consisting  of  mutual  assistance,  co-operation,  mutual  resemblance,  and 
interpenetration  among  the  species  of  beings,  so  on  the  face  of  the  earth  is  a  stamp 
affirming Divine unity placed through the army of the Glorious One, composed of the 
four  hundred  thousand  animal  and  plant  species,  all  being  given  their  different 
provisions,  weapons,  uniforms,  instructions,  and  discharges  with  complete  regularity 
and  no  confusion  at  exactly  the  right  time.  So  too  on  man’s face  a stamp of unity is 
placed through each having features distinguishing it from all other faces, as there is on 
the  faces  of  all  beings,  whether  particular  or  universal.  Also,  on  the  heads  of  all 
creatures, whether large or small, numerous or few, a seal of Divine oneness is to be 
observed.  The  stamps  on  living  creatures  are  particularly  brilliant;  indeed,  all  living 
creatures are themselves each a stamp of unity, and seal of oneness, and a signature of 
Eternal Besoughtedness. 

Yes, all flowers, all fruits, all leaves, all plants, all animals are such seals of Divine 
oneness and stamps of Eternal Besoughtedness that they transform all trees into being 
dominical  missives,  all  species  of  creatures  into  books  of  the  Most  Merciful,  and  all 
gardens into Divine decrees, placing stamps on the letters of the tree to the number of 
its blossoms, and signatures to the number of its fruits, and seals to the number of its 
leaves. In order to show their scribe, stamps have been put on the species and groups 
of  creatures  to  the  number  of  individuals.  And  in  order  to announce and describe its 
ruler,  stamps  have  been  set  on  the  decree  of  the garden to the  number of the plants, 
trees, and animals it contains. In fact there are four stamps of Divine unity on trees; on 
their origins, ends, outsides and insides, alluded to by the Names of “He is the First, 
and the Last, and the Outward, and the Inward.”15 

As the Name of First suggests, the original seeds16 of fruit-bearing  

                                             

15 Qur’an, 57:3. 
16 Since olden times, a common expression in the popular language was “to raise from seed,” 
which may be seen as a sort of allusion to the author of this treatise. For through the effulgence of the 
Qur’an, ‘the servant of the Risale-i Nur’ [its author] discovered two ascents in knowledge of God and 
the affirmation of Divine Unity in seeds and flowers. He discovered the water of life in the very places 
the Naturalists drowned. He reached reality and the light of knowledge of God from seeds. It is for 
this reason that these two things are repeated frequently in the Risale-i Nur. 

 

42

trees are coffers containing the programmes, indexes, and plans of the trees. They are 
workbenches  for  the  production  of  their  formation,  systems,  and  necessities;  and 
machines regulating the tiny amounts they take in and expend. 

As the Name of Last suggests, the results and fruits of trees are instruction sheets 
setting  forth  through  the  seeds  in  the  fruits’  hearts,  the  trees’  shapes,  attributes,  and 
stages; they are proclamations stating their functions, benefits, and characteristics; and 
summaries announcing the trees’ peers and progeny. 

As  the  Name  of  Outward  suggests,  the  forms  and  shapes  in  which  trees  are 
clothed  are  skilfully  fashioned  and  embroidered  garments  which  have  been  cut  out, 
trimmed,  and  decorated  exactly according to the branches, members and parts of  the 
trees. They are so fine, well-proportioned and full of meaning that they transform the 
trees into odes, missives, and books. 

As  the  name  of  Inward  suggests,  the  workbenches  within  trees  are  factories 
which produce all the parts and members of the trees, and manage and run them with 
the very  finest balance. They despatch too with perfect regularity and order, the food 
and  substances  necessary  for  all  the  separate  members.  Those  wondrous  factories 
function with the speed of lightning, the ease of setting a clock, and the uniformity of 
commanding an army. 

In  Short:  The  origins  of  trees  are  coffers  and  programmes,  their  ends  are 
instruction  sheets  and  samples,  their  outer  faces  are  artistically  fashioned  and 
embroidered garments, and their inner faces are factories and workbenches. These four 
aspects look to each other and as a whole form a supreme stamp. Indeed, a Greatest 
Name  becomes  apparent  through  them,  for  self-evidently  none  other  than the  Single 
Maker of Unity Who administers the whole universe could perform these works. Like 
trees, the origins, ends, and outer and inner faces of all animate creatures bear seals of 
Divine oneness and stamps of unity. 

Making  an  analogy  with  the  trees  in  these  three  examples,  the  spring  is  a  tree 
laden with blossoms. The seeds and roots entrusted to the hand of the autumn bear the 
stamp  of  the  Name  of  First.  The  fruits,  grains, and vegetables poured into the lap of 
summer, filling its skirts, bear the seal of the Name of Last. The brocades and natural 
garments decorated with a  

 

43

hundred thousand designs which the spring wears one on top of the other like a houri 
bear  the  seal of the Name of Outward. While  the factories of the Eternally Besought 
One working away in the springtime inside the earth, and the bubbling cauldrons of the 
Most Merciful and dominical kitchens cooking foods, each bear the signet of the Name 
of Inward. 

All  species,  for  instance  the  human  species,  are  trees:  just  as,  with  its  roots  and 
seeds in the past and fruits and results in the future, the orderly laws regulating sexual 
life  and  the  perpetuation  of  the  species  bears  a  stamp  of  unity;  so  its  present 
circumstances bear a stamp of unity governed by the principles of individual and social 
life; humankind bears a hidden, orderly seal of unity under the apparent disorder; and 
under its confused circumstances, it bears a stamp of unity governed by the principles 
of Divine Determining and Decree, known as the appointed course of life. 

 

44

Conclusion 

 [A  brief  allusion  to  the  other  pillars  of  belief,  within  the  mystery  of  the 
affirmation of Divine unity.] 

Heedless man! Come now and consider if only once the three Fruits, Necessitating 
Causes, and Proofs in the three Stations of this treatise:  is it at all possible, since the 
All-Powerful,  Wise,  Compassionate,  and  Knowing Maker Who has  disposal over the 
universe takes into account the smallest cure and least thanks; does not refer to others 
nor  is  indifferent  towards  the  tiniest  art,  such  as  that  of  a  fly’s  wing;  attaches  to  the 
lowliest  common  seed  duties  and  instances  of  wisdom  as  great  as a  tree;  and  makes 
perceived His mercifulness, compassionateness, and wisdom through all His arts, and 
Himself  known  through  every  means  and  loved  through  every  bounty  —  is  it  at  all 
possible  that  He  should  be  indifferent  towards  the  virtues  of  the  Muhammadan 
(PBUH) reality and his glorifications, and the lights of Islam? 

Is it at all possible that the Messengership of Muhammad (PBUH), which gilds all 
creatures  and  fills them  with joy, illuminates the universe and brings the heavens and 
earth  to  tumult,  and  has  for  fourteen  centuries  taken  under  its  rule,  physical  and 
spiritual, half the globe and a fifth of mankind, and has perpetuated that glorious rule 
on account of the Creator of the universe and in His Name — is it at all possible that 
his Messengership is not one of the Maker’s most important aims, lights, and mirrors; 
and  that  the  other  prophets,  who  served  the  same  truths  as  Muhammad  (PBUH), 
should not also have been that Maker’s envoys, friends, and officials? God forbid, to 
the number of the prophets’ miracles! 

And is it at all possible that the Wise and Compassionate Creator Who attaches a 
hundred  purposes  and  fruits  to  the  least  significant  thing  like  a  branch  or  twig,  and 
through  His  wisdom  and general mercifulness makes known His dominicality, should 
deny  all  His  wisdom  and  mercy,  and  even  His  dominicality  and  perfection,  by  not 
bringing about the resurrection, which is as easy for His power as the spring? Is it at 
all  possible  that  he  should  not  open  up  an  abode  of  happiness and everlasting realm, 
and make His wisdom and mercy, dominicality and perfection denied, and condemn to 
eternal annihilation all His beloved creatures whom He  

 

45

loves?  God  forbid,  a  hundred  thousand  times!  That  Absolutely  Beauteous  One  is 
utterly exempt from such an absolute abomination. 

A Lengthy Note 

A question related to the resurrection of the dead: 
The frequently repeated verse, 

It will be naught but a single cry,17 

and the verse, 

The command of the Hour will be like the glance of the eye,18 

show that the resurrection of the dead and Great Gathering will occur instantaneously, 
in  a  flash.  But  man’s  narrow  reason  requires  some  tangible  example  so  that  it  can 
conceive of this wondrous, extraordinary, and unparalleled event, and accept it. 

T h e  A n s w e r : At the resurrection there will be the return of spirits to their 
bodies, the revivification of the bodies, and the remaking of the bodies. It consists of 
three matters. 

THE  FIRST  MATTER:  An  example  for  the  return  of  spirits  to  their  bodies  is 
the  mustering,  at  a  loud  bugle  call,  of  the  members  of  a  disciplined  army  after  they 
have  dispersed  to  rest.  Yes,  the  Sur  of  the  Angel  Israfil  is  no  less  powerful  than  an 
army bugle. The spirits, too, who while in post-eternity, reply with “Yes, we accept” to 
the  question  “Am  I  not  your  Sustainer?”,19  which  comes  from  pre-eternity,  are 
infinitely more subjugated, disciplined, and obedient than the soldiers of an army. The 
Thirtieth  Word  has  demonstated  with  decisive  proofs  that  not  only  spirits,  but  all 
particles, form a Divine army and are its soldiers under command. 

SECOND MATTER: An example for the revivification of bodies is the springing 
to life in an instant of the hundred thousand electric lights of a large city on a festival 
night, switched on from one centre. It would be possible to light up in the same way a 
hundred  million  lamps  scattered  over  the  face  of  the  earth  from  one  centre.  Since 
through  the  training  and  instruction  in  regularity  and  order  it  has  received  from  its 
Creator,  a  creature  of  Almighty  God  like  electricity  —a  servant  and  candleholder  in 
His  guest-house—  possesses  this  quality,  surely  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  could 
occur  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  within  the  bounds  of  the  regular  laws  of  Divine 
wisdom which thousands of luminous servants represent, like electricity. 

                                             

17 Qur’an, 36:29. 
18 Qur’an, 16:77. 
19 Qur’an, 7:172. 

 

46

THIRD MATTER: An example for the remaking of bodies instantaneously is the 
perfect  remaking within  a  few  days  of  all  the  trees  in  the  spring,  which  are far more 
numerous than all humanity, together with all their leaves, in exactly the same way as 
those of  the previous spring; and the bringing into being, again like those of previous 
springs, all the blossoms, fruits and leaves of the trees with the speed of lightning; and 
the sudden awakening of the uncountable numbers of seeds, grains, and roots, which 
are the source of the spring, and their unfolding and being raised to life; and reflecting 
the meaning of “resurrection after death,” the sudden raising to life at a command of 
the upright skeleton-like corpses  of the trees; and the reanimation of the innumerable 
members  of  all  the  species  of  small  animals;  and  the  revivification  of  all  the  sorts  of 
flying  insects,  particularly  those  which  continually  cleaning  their  faces,  eyes,  and 
wings,  remind  us  of  our  ablutions  and  cleanliness,  and  caress  our  faces  —  the 
resurrection  and  remaking  of  all  the  members  of  this  tribe  within  a  few  days  every 
spring before our very eyes together with all the other species, despite being greater in 
number  than  all  mankind  since  the  time  of  Adam,  provides  not  one  example  of  the 
remaking of all human bodies at the resurrection, but thousands. 

Yes, since this world is the realm of wisdom and the hereafter the realm of power, 
numerous  Divine  Names  like  All-Wise,  Arranger,  Disposer,  and  Nurturer,  as  well  as 
dominical wisdom, require that the creation of things in this world is gradual and in the 
course  of  time.  In  the  hereafter,  however,  power and mercy will be manifested more 
than  wisdom,  and  there  being  no  need  for  matter,  time,  and  waiting,  things  will  be 
made instantaneously. Alluding to the fact that things which are made here in a day or 
in a year will be made in the hereafter in an instant or a flash, the Qur’an of Miraculous 
Exposition states: 

The command of the Hour will be like the glance of the eye, or briefer.20 

If you want to be as certain about the occurrence of the resurrection of the dead 
as you are about the arrival of next spring, study the Tenth and Twenty-Ninth Words 
carefully, which are about this, and you will see! If you do not then believe that it will 
occur as you believe the coming of spring, come and stick your finger in my eye! 

A  FOURTH  MATTER:  The  death  of  the  world  and  Doomsday.  The  sudden 
collision  with  this  globe,  our  guest-house,  at  a  dominical  command,  of  a  planet  or 
comet, could wipe out this dwelling-place of ours. Like the  

                                             

20 Qur’an, 16:77. 

 

47

destruction in a minute of a palace the building of which had taken ten years. 

The  above  summaries  of  the  four  matters  of  the  resurrection  are  sufficient  for 

now, and we return to our main subject. 

Also,  is  it  at  all  possible  that  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition,  which  is  the 
eloquent interpreter of all  the universe’s elevated truths, the miraculous tongue of all 
the perfections of the universe’s Creator and the wondrous collection of all His aims, 
should not be that Creator’s word? God forbid, to the number of the mysteries of its 
verses. 

Also,  is  it  at  all  possible  that  the  All-Wise  Maker  should  cause  his  living  and 
conscious creatures to speak with one another in all their myriad tongues, and that He 
should  know  their  voices  and  what  they  say,  and  listen  to  them  and  clearly  reply 
through His acts and bounties, but Himself not speak or not be able to speak? Is there 
any  possibility  or  probability  of  this?  Since  self-evidently  He  speaks  and  the  chief  of 
those addressed by His speech, who comprehends it perfectly, is man; more certainly, 
foremost the Qur’an and all well-known holy scriptures are His speech. 

Also, is it at all possible that the All-Wise Maker, Who made the universe a means 
of  making  Himself  known,  loved,  and praised; and through His multifarious bounties 
makes  living  creatures  happy  and  contented,  and  their  thanks  and  gratitude  a 
significant  pivot  of  His  dominicality;  and  made  the  vast  universe together with all its 
elements  and  realms,  a  docile  servant,  a  dwelling-place,  an  exhibition,  and  banquet; 
and  so  wanted  to  multiply  the  thousands  of  all  the  different  sorts  of  animate  beings, 
that He made some of the leaves of trees that do not bear fruit like the poplar and elm 
both the cradle, and the womb, and the foodstore for the living creatures that perform 
their glorifications in the air, that is, for a regiment of flies; —is it at all possible that 
having done all this he should leave empty, purposeless, and without owner, life, spirit, 
or  inhabitants  the  adorned  heavens  and  light-scattering  stars;  that  is,  that  He  should 
leave them without angels and spirit beings? God forbid, to the number of angels and 
spirit beings! 

Also, is it at all possible that the All-Wise Maker, the Disposer, should write with 
the pen of His determining in the seeds and fruits of the commonest plant and smallest 
tree their origins and ends and the courses of their lives within a perfect order, and that 
He  should  write  with  perfect  order  and  differentiation  the  origins  and  results  of  the 
vast spring as though it were a tree, and not remain indifferent to the least signficant 
things,  then  not  record  the  actions  and  deeds  of  man,  which  have  great  importance, 
since he is the result of the universe, vicegerent of the  

 

48

earth,  the  supervisor  of  all  the  realms  of  beings  and  their  officer;  that  He should not 
include them within His determining or be unconcerned with them? God forbid, to the 
number of the deeds of man, all of which will be weighed up on the scales! 

In Short: The universe together with all its truths shouts out: 

I  believe  in  God,  and  in  His  angels,  and  messengers,  and  in  the  Last  Day, 
and  in  Divine  Determining,  that  both  the  good  of  it  and  the  evil  of  it  are 
from  God  Almighty,  and  that  resurrection  after  death  is  the  truth;  I  testify 
that there is no god but God, and I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger 
of God, may God grant blessings to him and to his Family and Companions, 
and grant them peace. Amen. 

A Supplication about Divine Unity 
and its Introduction 

In his Qasidat al-Jaljalutiya in the place he mentions it, Imam ‘Ali (May God be 
pleased  with him  and  honour  him)  gives the Risale-i Nur the names of Siracü’n-Nur 
and  Siracü’s-Sürc  in  wondrous  fashion.  Since  he gives it these two additional names 
and  the  name  Siracü’n-Nur  is  repeatedly  mentioned  in  the  present  treatise,  we  have 
taken one of his most important supplications, and expanding it two degrees, offer it in 
his elevated tongue and in our tongues on his account to the Court of the Single One 
of Unity. 

Supplication 

O  God!  There  is  in  the  heavens  no  circulation,  no  star,  and  no  motion  of  the 

In the atmosphere no cloud, no lightning, and no glorification of the thunder... 
On the earth no profusion of animate beings and no wondrous artefact... 
In the seas not a droplet of water nor a fish nor any strange creature... 
On the mountains no stone or plant, and within them no mineral... 
On the trees, no leaf or blossom, nor any decorated fruit... 
In  the  bodies  of  living  things  no  activity,  nor  any  well-ordered  member  or 

planets... 

system... 

In man’s heart no thought, no inspiration, and no illumined belief... 
But it testifies to the necessity of Your existence and is evidence for Your unity, 
and  in  Your  dominions  is  utterly  subjugated.  Through  the  power  by  which  You 
subjugate the heavens and earth, subjugate to me  

 

49

my soul and subjugate to me my wish, and subjugate to the Risale-i Nur and to 
service of the Qur’an and belief the hearts of Your servants and the hearts of the 
spirit beings, both elevated and lowly; O All-Hearing! O Near One! O Answerer 
of Prayer! Amen. And all praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught us; 
indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.21 

                                             

21 Qur’an, 2:32. 

 

50

The Third Ray 
A Supplication 

 [This  treatise  proves  with  extraordinary  decisiveness,  authenticity,  and 
certainty  together  with  a  wondrous  conciseness,  the  most  important  of  the 
fundamentals of belief such as the necessary existence, unity, and oneness of 
God,  the  splendour  of  His  dominicality,  the  immensity  of  His  power,  the 
breadth  of  His  mercy, 
the 
comprehensiveness  of  His  knowledge,  and  the  all-inclusiveness  of  His 
wisdom. The indications of the resurrection of the dead, and especially those 
emphasized at the end, are extremely powerful.] 

the  universality  of  His  sovereignty, 

Introduction 

This Eighth Proof of the Fundamentals of Belief1 offers evidence for the necessary 
existence  and  unity  of  God,  and  certain  proofs  of  the  comprehensiveness  of 
dominicality  and 
the 
comprehensiveness of Divine sovereignty, and the extensiveness of Divine mercy, and 
the  encompassment of  Divine  knowledge,  and  the  fact  that  Divine  wisdom  embraces 
all the beings of the universe. 

immensity  of  Divine  power.  It  proves 

too  both 

the 

In  Short:  In  each  of  the  introductory  passages  of  this  Eighth  Proof  are  eight 
conclusions.2  Proving  these  eight  conclusions  through  their  evidences,  this  Eighth 
Proof has high value. 

                                             

1The Eighth Proof of the Fundamentals of Belief refers to this treatise’s position among the parts 

of the Risale-i Nur included in the collection called Asâ-yi Musa (The Staff of Moses). [Tr.] 

2 All the ‘Proofs of the Fundamentals of Belief’ demonstrate the necessary existence and unity 

of God explicitly, and their other conclusions indirectly. In addition to proving explicitly God’s 
necessary existence and unity, this Eighth Proof, A Supplication, has nine conclusions. It proves:  

i. The majesty of dominicality; 
ii. The tremendousness of Divine power; 
iii. The comprehensiveness of Divine sovereignty; 
iv. The unbounded extensiveness of Divine mercy; 
v. The fact that Divine knowledge embraces all things; 
vi. The encompassment of Divine wisdom; 
vii. The glittering magnificence of Divine rule. 

 

51

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Behold!  In  the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth;  in  the  alternation  of 
night  and  the  day;  in  the  sailing  of  the  ships  through  the  oceans  for  the 
profit of mankind; in the rain which God sends down from the skies, and the 
life He gives therewith to an earth that is dead; in the beasts of all kinds that 
He  scatters  through  the  earth;  in  the  disposal  of  the  winds  and  the  clouds 
subjugated  between  the  sky  and  the  earth,  indeed  are  signs  for  people  who 
think.3 

[This  treatise,  A  Supplication,  which  forms  the  Third  Ray,  is  a  sort  of 
commentary on the above verse.] 

God’s  Most  Noble  Messenger  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him),  the  supreme 
Qur’anic commentator and interpreter, expounded one level —about Divine unity— of 
the numerous luminous levels of this sublime verse in one of the ninety-nine sections of 
his  peerless  supplication,  Jawshan  al-Kabir.  Alluding  in  the  supplication  through  a 
thousand  and  one  Divine  Names  to  a  thousand  and  one  proofs  of  Divine  unity,  he 
described his Sustainer. One of those sections is this:  

O You Who is the First of all things, and the Last;  
O God of all things, and their Maker;  
O Provider of all things, and their Creator;  
O Maker of all things, and their Owner;  
O Giver of want to all things, and Giver of plenty;  
O Originator of all things, and their Renewer;  
O Causer of all things, Who determines them with due measure;  
O Nurturer of all things, and their Administrator;  
O You Who ‘rolls up’ all things, and causes their constant change;  
O Giver of life to all things, and Dealer of death.  
Glory be unto You! There is no god but You! Mercy! Mercy! Deliver us from 
Hell-fire! 

This sample shows that the Noble Messenger’s (Peace and blessings be upon him) 
knowledge  of God, and his proofs of Divine unity were at such a level that no one is 
equal to him, and that in this field he is the supreme  

                                             

3 Qur’an, 2:164. 

 

52

leader. By following him, everyone may enter that treasury. It is clear that knowledge, 
sciences,  and  arts  are  perfected  through  the  conjunction  of  ideas  and  blending  of 
minds; through ideas being combined and different works complementing each other, 
the  works  are  perfected.  This  is  why  the  craftsman  who  invented  the  shishhane  rifle 
was more skilful than the one who invented the machine gun now. Whereas one who 
listens  attentively  with  the  ear  of  the  heart  to  the  supplication  of  Jawshan  al-Kabir, 
imagining himself to be in the presence of the Unlettered Prophet (PBUH) and hearing 
it from him, will understand and see that those thousand and one sacred truths, which 
comprise  a  thousand  and  one  proofs  and  descriptions,  and  each  of  which  is  the 
conclusion  of  a  chain  of  thought  and  a  window  opening  onto  Divine  unity,  were 
composed  by  one  unlettered  (PBUH)  among  an  illiterate  people  in  an  illiterate 
environment, and a nation lacking a holy scripture in totally original, inventive fashion 
imitating  no  one,  solving  on  his  own  through  illumination  the  riddle  of  creation  and 
talisman of the universe. This was not in imitative fashion like today with the help and 
supplications  of  thousands  of  other  luminaries,  but  out  of  his  boundless  compassion 
and  infinite  clemency  —due  to  which  he  invites  to  listen  both  the  inhabitants  of  the 
heavens under the celestial dome and the vast congregation in the huge mosque of the 
universe— he seeks help, succour, mercy, and salvation for men, and he says: 

O You Who in the heavens is His grandeur;  
O You Who in the earth are His signs;  
O You Who in all things are His evidences;  
O You Who in the ocean are His strange wonders;  
O You Who originates creation then renews it;  
O You Who in the mountains are His treasures;  
O You Who creates everything in the best way;  
O You to Whom return all matters;  
O You Whose grace is apparent in all things;  
O You Who displays His power through all creatures.  
Glory be unto You! There is no god but You! Mercy! Mercy! Deliver us from 
Hell-fire! 

Here,  the  Supreme  Qur’anic  Commentator  is  expounding  one  aspect  of  the  above 
verse. A short translation and meaning of it is this. He says:  

“O  One  of  Glory  Whose  magnificence  is  to  be  seen  in  the  skies  and  heavenly 
bodies!  O  One  of  Perfection,  the  signs  and  evidences  of  Whose  unity  are  to  be 
observed  in  the  earth  and  in  all  its  beings!  O  Necessary  Existent,  proofs  to  Whose 
necessary  existence  are  present  in all things and all creatures! O All-Glorious One of 
Perfection, Who creates all the  

 

53

strange  beings  in  the  vast  oceans!  O  Munificent  Creator,  Who  creates  the  treasures 
stored up in the mountains to meet the needs of living beings! O Beauteous Bestower 
of Bounties, Who creates everything in the best way, administers them in the best way, 
and provides all the necessaries for each in the best way! O Omnipotent One, Sustainer 
of  All  Things,  to  Whom  all  things  have  recourse in  all  matters,  for all needs, and on 
Whom  all  beings  rely  in  all  circumstances,  and  to  Whom  pertain  all  rights  and  dues, 
judgements  and  rule!  O  Gracious  and  Knowing  One,  the  clear  traces  of  Whose 
favours, and the manifestations of Whose grace, and the subtle inscriptions of Whose 
arts, and the fine gifts of Whose mercy, are observed in all things! O All-Powerful and 
Wise  One,  Who  made  the  universe  an  exhibition  of  marvels  in  order  to  display  His 
power  to  His  conscious  creatures,  and  made  all  His  artefacts  heralds  and 
proclamations  announcing  His  perfections,  such  as  His  power,  wisdom,  and  mercy! 
You  are  free  of  all  impotence  and  fault;  Other  than  You  there  is  no  god  who  might 
succour our plight! Mercy! Mercy! Save us from Hell-fire!” 

God’s  Most  Noble  Messenger  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him),  the  Supreme 
Qur’anic  commentator,  expounded  the  verse  with  this  supplication.  Then  the 
Messenger’s important, precise, intelligent, and exacting student, Imam ‘Ali (May God 
be  pleased  with  him),  composed  a  supplication-like  commentary  on  his  Master’s 
supplicatory  commentary,  and  discovering  another  aspect  of  the  supplication, 
uncovered  a  further  face  of  the  verse.  Keeping  in  mind  his  Noble  Master’s 
supplication,  he  described  that  aspect  of  the  verse  as  follows.  As  we  gave  a  short 
meaning and translation of the supplication above, so do we for this one: 

“O  God!  In the heavens are no rotations or motions  but through their order and 
wisdom  they  testify  to  your  existence,  making  You  known.  On  the  earth  are  no 
changes  and  transformations, and  no states or circumstances, but through their order 
and  regularity  they  make  You  known  together  with  Your  unity  and  dominicality.  In 
the seas is no creature, nor even a drop of water, but through its wisdom it points to 
Your  existence  and  testifies  to  Your  dominicality.  In  the  mountains  are  no  minerals, 
chemicals,  or  rocks,  stored  up  for  living  beings,  but  through  their  uses  and  benefits 
they  testify  to  Your  dominicality  and  existence.  In  the  heart  is  no  thought  inspired 
from  the  Unseen  but  it  points  to  Your  existence  and  testifies  to  Your  unity.  On the 
trees  are  no  leaves  but  through  their  order  and  wisdom  they  recognize  You,  that  is, 
they proclaim that they are the works of Your art. In bodies there are no movements 
but  they  testify  to  Your  dominicality.  O  my  Creator!  For  the  sake  of  Your  power, 
which subjugates the heavens and the earth, subjugate to me those things that I wish!” 

 

54

Now,  an  impotent  student  of  Imam  ‘Ali  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him)  and 
wretched  servant  of  the  Qur’an,  expounding  this  supplication  of  his  also  with  a 
supplication,  wanted  to  disclose  in  the  light  of  the  Greatest  Name  one  aspect  of  the 
sublime verse by expounding that aspect of the above supplication, which is only one 
of  the  hundred  sections  of  the  supplication  of  the  Supreme  Interpreter,  that  is, 
Jawshan al-Kabir. The student of Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) says: 

O My God and Sustainer! 
I  see  through  the  eyes  of  belief,  the  instruction  and  light  of  the  Qur’an,  the 
teachings  of  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him),  and  the 
indications  of  the  Name  of  All-Wise,  that  in  the  heavens  there  are  no  rotations  and 
motions but through their order and regularity they point to Your existence. There is 
no  heavenly  body  but  through  its  silently  performing  its  duty  and  remaining  in  place 
without prop it testifies to Your dominicality and unity. There is no star but through its 
balanced  creation,  regular  position,  luminous  smile,  and  the  stamp  of its similarity to 
the other stars, it indicates the majesty of Your Godhead and Your unity. There is not 
one  of  the  twelve  planets  but  through  its  wise  motion,  docile  subjection,  orderly 
duties,  and  significant  satellites,  it  testifies  to  Your  necessary  existence  and  indicates 
the sovereignty of Your Godhead. 

Yes,  —O  Creator  of  the  Heavens  and  Earth,  Who  directs  and  administers  all 
particles together with all the orderly components they make up, and spins the planets 
and  their  regular  satellites,  subjugating  them  to  His  command!—  just  as  each  of the 
inhabitants of the heavens testifies on its own, so in their totality they testify to Your 
necessary existence and unity in a way so clear and powerful that shining proofs to the 
number of stars in the heavens affirm that testimony. 

Also, appearing as a regular army or imperial fleet decked out with electric lights, 
the  limpid,  beautiful,  spotless  heavens  with  their  extraordinarily  huge  and  speedy 
bodies,  point  clearly  to  the  splendour  of  your  dominicality  and  tremendousness  of 
Your power, which creates all things; and to the boundless extent of Your sovereignty, 
which overspreads the heavens, and to Your mercy, which embraces all living things; 
and  testifies  indubitably  to  the  comprehensiveness  of  Your  knowledge,  which  is 
concerned with all the states and circumstances of all the creatures of the heavens, and 
embraces them and orders them,  and to Your wisdom, which encompasses all things. 
This  testimony  is  so  evident  it  is  as  though  the  stars  are  the  words  and  luminous 
embodiments of the skies’ testimony. 

 

55

Also, like disciplined soldiers, orderly ships, wondrous aeroplanes, or marvellous 
lamps, the stars in the arena of the heavens, and in their seas and vast spaces, show the 
glittering splendour of the sovereignty of Your Godhead. As is suggested by the duties 
of  the  sun  —one  star  among  the  members  of  that  army—  which  are  related  to  its 
planets  and our earth, some of its companions, the other stars, look to the worlds of 
the hereafter and are not without duties; they are the suns of eternal worlds. 

O Necessarily Existent! O Single One of Unity! 
These wondrous stars, these strange suns and moons, are subjugated, set in order, 
and  employed  in Your dominions, in Your heavens, through Your command, power, 
and strength, and Your administration and direction. All those heavenly bodies glorify 
and  exalt  their  single Creator, Who creates, spins, and administers  them; through the 
tongue of disposition, they declare: “Glory be to God! God is Most Great!” Through 
all their glorifications, I too declare You holy. 

O Omnipotent One of Glory, hidden in the intensity of His manifestation and 

concealed in the magnificence of His grandeur! O One of Absolute Power! 

I have understood through the teaching of the All-Wise Qur’an and instruction of 
Your  Most  Noble  Messenger  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him)  that  just  as  the 
heavens  and  stars  testify  to  your  existence  and  unity,  so  with  its  clouds,  lightning, 
thunder, winds, and rain, does the atmosphere testify to Your necessary existence and 
unity. 

Yes,  the  lifeless,  unconscious  clouds  sending  the  water  of  life,  rain,  to  the 
assistance  of  needy  living  beings  is  only  through  Your  mercy  and  wisdom;  confused 
chance  could  in  no  way  interfere.  The  most  powerful  of  electricity,  lightning,  which 
alluding  to  its  potentiality  for  lighting,  encourages  man  to  benefit  from  it  and 
spectacularly  lights  up  Your  power  in  space.  The  thunder  announces  the  coming  of 
rain,  causing  boundless  space  to  speak,  and  makes  the  heavens  ring  out  with  the 
reverberations  of  its  glorifying;  it  hallows  You  verbally,  testifying  to  Your 
dominicality.  The  winds,  which  are  charged  with  numerous  duties  like  providing the 
sustenance  most  vital  for  animate  creatures,  and  the  easiest  to  benefit  from,  and 
ensuring  and  facilitating  respiration,  for  some  purpose  turn  the  atmosphere  into  a 
‘tablet  for  writing  and  erasing,’  thus  pointing  to  the  activity  of  Your  power  and 
testifying  to  Your  existence.  Similarly,  the  mercy  milked  through  Your  compassion 
from the clouds and sent to living beings, testifies through the words of its balanced, 
orderly droplets, to the breadth of Your mercy and compassion. 

 

56

O Potent and Active Disposer! O Sublime and Bountiful Bestower! 
The  clouds,  lightning,  thunder,  wind,  and  rain  each testify on their own to Your 
necessary existence, so  too as a whole, being one within the other and  assisting each 
other in their duties, although they are by nature dissimilar and opposed to each other, 
they indicate most powerfully Your unity. They point too to the magnificence of Your 
dominicality, which makes the vast atmosphere into an exhibition of wonders, on some 
days  filling  and  emptying  it several times; and to the immensity and all-pervasiveness 
of Your power, which makes it resemble a slate which is written on then rubbed clean, 
and  wrings  it  out  like  a  sponge  and  waters  the  garden  of  the  earth;  and  to  your 
unbounded mercy and limitless rule, which under the veil of the atmosphere administer 
all the earth and all creatures. Moreover, the air is employed in duties so wise and the 
clouds and rain utilized in benefits so percipient that if it was not for a knowledge and 
wisdom that encompass all things, they could not be thus employed. 

O You Who acts as He wishes! 
Through  Your  activity  in  the  atmosphere,  Your  power,  which  continuously 
displays examples of the resurrection of the dead and Great Gathering and transforms 
the summer into winter and winter into summer and similar acts, gives the sign that it 
will transform this world into the hereafter and there display its everlasting acts. 

O All-Powerful One of Glory! 
The air, clouds, rain, and thunder and lightning in the atmosphere are subjugated 
and  employed  in  Your  dominions,  through  Your  command  and  power  and  strength. 
These creatures, which by nature are so different to each other, sanctify their ruler and 
commander, who makes them submit instanteously to his swift commands; they praise 
and extol His mercy. 

O Glorious Creator of the Heavens and Earth! 
Through  the  instruction  of  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  and  teaching  of  God’s  Noble 
Messenger  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him),  I  believe  and  know  that  just  as  the 
heavens  testify  to  Your  necessary  existence  and  unity  through  its  stars  and  the 
atmosphere  testifies  through  all  it  contains,  so  the  earth  testifies  to  Your  existence 
and unity through all its creatures and states. 

Indeed,  there  is  no  change  on  the  earth,  such  as  that  of  the  trees  and  animals 
changing their garb every year, but through its orderliness it indicates Your existence 
and  unity.  There  is  no  animal  but  through  its  sustenance  being  compassionately 
provided in relation to its need and weakness, and its being given all the members and 
faculties necessary to  

 

57

pursue  its  life,  it  testifies  to  Your  existence  and unity. There is not a plant or animal 
created  before  our  eyes  in  the  spring  that  through  its  wondrous  art,  its  subtle 
adornment, its being distinguished from all other creatures, and through its order and 
balance, it makes you known. The marvels of Your power which fill the earth and are 
known as plants and animals, and their creation from seeds and grains and droplets of 
fluid, perfectly, without error, in adorned fashion, each with its distinguishing features, 
form  a  testimony  more  brilliant  and  powerful  than  the  sun  to  the  existence,  unity, 
wisdom, and endless power of their All-Wise Maker. 

Also, there is no element, such as air, water, light, fire, and earth, but through its 
performing  functions  consciously  and  perfectly  despite  its  lack  of consciousness, and 
being the means for the arrival of various well-ordered fruits from the treasury of the 
Unseen  despite  being  simple,  without  order,  and  overrunning  and  spreading 
everywhere, it testifies to Your existence and unity. 

O Omnipotent Creator! O Omniscient Opener Up Of Forms! O Active Creator! 
Just as together with all its inhabitants the earth testifies to the necessary existence 
of  its  Creator,  so  too,  O  Single  One  of  Unity!  O  Clement  and  Kind  One!  O  Most 
Bounteous Provider!, through the stamp on its face and the stamps on the faces of all 
its inhabitants and their unity and being one within the other and assisting each other, 
and through all the Names and acts of dominicality that look to them being the same, it 
testifies with the utmost clarity to Your unity and oneness; indeed it offers testimony 
to the number of its creatures. 

Similarly,  through  its  being  an  army  encampment,  an  exhibition,  a  place  of 
instruction, and through all the four hundred thousand different nations present in the 
divisions of its plants and animals regularly being given all their necessary equipment, 
the  earth  points  to  the  magnificence  of  Your  dominicality  and  to  the  fact  that  Your 
power penetrates all things.  

Also, all the different sustenance of innumerable living beings, and its being given 
to them compassionately, generously, at exactly the right time from simple, dry earth, 
and  the  complete  subjugation  and  obedience  to  the  dominical  commands  of  those 
innumerable  individuals,  demonstrates  that  Your  mercy  embraces  all  things  and  that 
your sovereignty encompasses them. 

Also,  the  despatch  of  the  caravans  of  creatures,  which  are  in  a state of constant 
change on the earth, and the alternations of life and death, and the administration and 
management of the plants and animals, and this  

 

58

being  possible  only  through  a  knowledge  that  is  concerned  with  all  things  and  an 
infinite wisdom governing in all things, points to Your comprehensive knowledge and 
wisdom. 

Also, the supreme importance given to man, who in a brief span performs infinite 
duties, has been equiped with abilities and faculties which  suggest he is to live for all 
eternity, and has disposal over all the beings of the earth; and the infinite outlay made 
for him in this training-ground of the world, this temporary military encampment of the 
earth,  this  transient  exhibition;  and  the  boundless  manifestations  of  dominicality, 
innumerable Divine addresses, and incalculable Divine gifts, which look to him, surely 
cannot be contained in this fleeting, sorry, confused life, this transitory world so full of 
tribulation. Since they could be only for another, eternal, life and an everlasting abode 
of bliss, they point to, even testify to, the bestowals of the hereafter in the everlasting 
realm. 

O Creator of All Things! 
All the creatures of the earth are administered and subjugated in Your dominions, 
in  Your  earth,  through  Your  strength  and  power  and  will,  and  Your  knowledge  and 
wisdom.  The  dominicality  whose  activity  is  observed  on  the  face  of  the  earth  is  so 
comprehensive  and  all-embracing,  and  its  administration  and  management  are  so 
perfect  and  precise,  and  it  is  carried  out  with  such  sameness  that  it  shows  it  is  a 
dominicality,  a  disposal,  which  is  a  whole  that  cannot  be  broken  into  parts  and  a 
universal  that  cannot  be  divided  up.  Together  with  all  its  inhabitants,  the  earth 
sanctifies and glorifies its Maker with innumerable tongues far clearer than the spoken 
word;  they  praise  and  extol  their  Glorious Provider for His infinite bounties with the 
tongues of their beings. 

O Most Pure and Holy One, hidden in the intensity of  His manifestation and 

concealed in the magnificence of His grandeur! 

Through  all  the  sanctifications  and  glorifications  of  the  earth  I  sanctify  you  and 
declare You to be free of all fault, impotence, and partners; and through all its praise 
and extolling, I offer You praise and thanks. 
O Sustainer of the Land and the Seas! 
I have understood from the teaching of the Qur’an and instruction of Your Most 
Noble  Messenger  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him)  that  just  as  the  skies,  the 
atmosphere and the earth testify to Your unity and necessary existence, so do the seas, 
rivers, streams, and springs testify to them most clearly. Yes, there is no being in the 
seas, which are like the strange boilers of our world producing steam —there is not a 
drop of them even— but through its well-ordered being, its benefits and state, it  

 

59

makes  known  its  Creator. And of the strange  creatures whose splendid sustenance is 
given them out of simple sand and water, and the living creatures of the seas with their 
well-ordered  beings,  especially  of  the  fishes  who  populate  the  seas  with  one  fish 
producing  a  million  eggs,  there  is  not  one  but  through  its  creation  and  its  duties,  its 
being sustained and administered, nurtured and superintended, it indicates its Creator 
and testifies to its Provider. 

Also, of the precious, decorated jewels in the seas, there is not one but through its 
attractive  creation  and  beneficial  qualities  it  recognizes  You  and makes  You  known. 
Yes,  just  as  they  testify  to  You  singly,  so  too  in  so  far  as  they  are  all  mixed  up 
together,  bear  the  same  stamp  in  their  natures,  are  created  with  great  ease,  and  are 
found in great numbers, they altogether testify to Your unity.  

Also, through the seas, which surround the globe with its land masses, being held 
suspended  without  spilling  over  or  dispersing  or  overrunning  the  land  as  the  earth 
voyages around the sun; and creating the multifarious ornamented living creatures and 
jewels  out  of  simple  sand  and  water,  and  all  their  sustenance  and  other  needs  being 
supplied  in  general  and  complete  fashion;  and  through  their  administration,  and 
through none of the inevitable innumerable corpses of their dead fellows being found 
on the surface of the seas; they testify indirectly to their number to Your existence and 
its necessity.  

Also,  just  as  they  point  clearly  to  the  splendid  sovereignty  of  Your  dominicality 
and  to  the  magnificence  of  Your  power,  which  encompasses  all  things;  so  do  they 
indicate the limitless breadth of Your mercy and rule, which govern all things from the 
huge  yet  orderly  stars  beyond  the  skies  to  the  tiny  fishes  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea, 
which are nurtured in regular fashion. They point too to Your knowledge and wisdom, 
which  as  demonstrated  by  the  order,  benefits,  instances  of  wisdom,  and  the  balance 
and  equilibrium  of  all  things,  encompass  and  comprehend  them.  There  being  such 
reservoirs of mercy for the travellers in this guest-house of the world and their being 
utilized for man’s journeying, and for his ship, and his benefit shows that the One Who 
bestows  such  a  profusion  of  gifts  out  of  the  seas  on  his  guests  of  one  night  in  a 
wayside inn, must surely have eternal seas of mercy at the seat of His everlasting rule, 
and those here are merely their small and transitory samples.  

Thus,  the  truly  wondrous  situation  of  the  seas  around  the  earth  and  the 
exceedingly  orderly  administration  and  nurturing  of  their  creatures  demonstrate  self-
evidently  that  it  is  only  through  Your  power,  will,  and  administration  that  they  are 
subjugated to Your command in Your domin 

 

60

ions;  and  through  the  tongues  of  their  beings  they  sanctify  their  Creator,  declaring: 
“God is Most Great!” 

O  All-Powerful One  of  Glory,  Who  makes  the  mountains  masts  and  holds  of 

treasure for the ship of the earth! 

Through the instruction of Your  Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon 
him) and the teaching of the Wise Qur’an, I have understood that just as the seas with 
their  strange  creatures  recognize  You  and  make  You  known,  so  do  the  mountains 
through the wise services they perform. For they ensure that the earth is released from 
the  effects  of  earthquakes  and  internal  upheavals;  save  it  from  being  overrun  by  the 
seas; purify the air of poisonous gases; are tanks for the saving and storage of water; 
and treasuries for the minerals and metals necessary for living beings.  

Yes,  there  is  not  one  of  the  stones  to  be  found  in  mountains,  or  the  various 
substances used as remedies for illness, or the varieties of metals and minerals, which 
are  essential  for  living  beings  and  especially  man,  or  the  species  of  plants  that adorn 
the mountains and plains with their flowers and fruits, but through the wisdom, order, 
and fine creation it displays, which is impossible to ascribe to chance, it testifies to the 
necessary  existence  of  an  infinitely  Powerful,  Wise,  Compassionate,  and  Munificent 
Maker. This is especially true of substances found in the mountains like salt, potassium 
oxalate,  quinine  sulphate,  and  alum,  which  superficially  resemble  each  other,  but 
whose tastes are totally dissimilar; and particularly of all the varieties of plants, and the 
great diversity of their flowers and fruits. Moreover, through their being administered 
and  managed  as  a  totality,  and  their  origins,  situations,  creation,  and  art  all  being 
similar,  and  the  ease,  speed,  and  cheapness  in  their  making,  they  testify  to  the  unity 
and oneness of their Maker. 

Also,  the  creatures  on  the  surface  of  the  mountains  and  inside  them  being  made 
everywhere  on  the  earth  at  the  same time  in  the  same  fashion,  perfectly  and  without 
error,  with  none  impeding  others,  and  their  being  created  without  confusion  despite 
being intermingled with all the other sorts of other creatures, all point to the splendour 
of Your dominicality and the immensity of Your power, for which nothing is difficult. 

Also,  the  mountains  —both  their  surfaces  and  their  interiors—  being  filled  in 
orderly  fashion  with  trees,  plants,  and  minerals  to  meet  the  innumerable  needs  of  all 
the  living  creatures  on  the  earth,  and  even  to  supply  the  remedies  for  their  many 
different  illnesses,  and  gratify  their  various  appetites  and  tastes,  and  these  being 
displayed  for  those  who  need  them,  indicates  the  infinite  breadth of Your mercy and 
infinite extent of Your  

 

61

the  soil 

sovereignty. While their being prepared percipiently, knowingly, without confusion, in 
orderly  fashion  according  to  need,  despite  being  all  mixed  up  and  concealed  in  the 
darkness  of 
indicates  Your  all-embracing  knowledge,  which 
encompasses  all  things,  and  the  comprehensiveness  of  Your  wisdom,  which  sets  all 
things  in  order.  Then  the  storing  up  of  medicinal  substances,  minerals,  and  metals 
points clearly to the compassionate, generous, planned processes of Your dominicality 
and the subtle precautions of Your grace. 

layer, 

Also, the lofty mountains holding stored up in orderly fashion the reserves to meet 
the  future  needs  of  the  travellers  in  the  guest-house  of  this  world,  and  their  being 
stores  stocked  up  with  all  the  treasures  necessary  for  life,  indicates,  indeed,  testifies, 
that  the Maker Who is thus Munificent and hospitable, All-Wise and Compassionate, 
Powerful  and  nurturing,  surely  possesses  eternal  treasuries  for  His  never-ending 
bestowal  in  an  everlasting  realm,  for  His  guests  Whom  He  clearly  loves.  There  the 
stars will perform the function the mountains perform here. 

O One Powerful Over All Things! 
The  mountains  and  the  creatures  within  them  are  subjugated  and  stored  up  in 
Your  dominions  through  Your  power  and  strength,  Your  knowledge  and  wisdom! 
They sanctify and glorify their Creator, Who subjugates and employs them in this way. 

O Merciful Creator, Compassionate Sustainer! 
Through the instruction of Your  Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon 
him) and the teaching of the Wise Qur’an I have understood that just as the heavens, 
atmosphere,  earth,  seas,  and  mountains,  together  with  their  creatures  and  all  they 
contain,  recognize  You  and  make  You  known;  so  too  do  all  the  trees  and  plants, 
together with all their leaves and flowers and fruits. All their leaves, with their ecstatic 
movements  and  recitations; all  their  flowers, which describe through their decoration 
the Names of their Maker; and all their fruits, which smile with their agreeableness and 
the  manifestation  of  Your  compassion,  testify  —through  the  order  within  their 
wondrous art, which is utterly impossible to ascribe to chance, and the balance within 
the  order,  and  the  adornment  within  the  balance,  and  the  embroideries  within  the 
adornment,  and  the  fine  and  various  scents  within  the  embroideries,  and  the  varying 
tastes of the fruits within the scents— so clearly as to be self-evident to the necessary 
existence  of  an  infinitely  Compassionate  and  Munificent  Maker.  At  the  same  time, 
their  similarity  and  mutual  resemblance  throughout  the  earth,  and  their  bearing  the 
same  stamps  on  their  creation,  and  their  being  related  in  their  administration  and 
organization, and the coincidence of the creative  

 

62

acts and dominical Names connected with them, and the innumerable members of their 
one  hundred  thousand  species  being  raised  one  within  the  other  without  confusion, 
forms  a  testimony  through  them  as  a  whole  to  the  unity  and  oneness  of  their 
Necessarily Existent Maker. 

Also,  just  as  they  testify  to  Your  necessary  existence  and  unity,  so  too  the 
nurturing  and  administration  in hundreds of ways of the innumerable members of the 
army  of  living  creatures  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  which  is  formed  of  four  hundred 
thousand  different  nations,  perfectly,  with  no  confusion  or  difficulty,  point  to  the 
majesty of Your dominicality within Your unity and to the immensity of Your power, 
which creates a flower as easily as the spring, and its comprehending all things. They 
point  also  to  the  unlimited  breadth  of  Your  mercy,  which  prepares  innumerable 
varieties of foods for animals and men all over the earth; and through all those works 
and  bestowals,  administering  and  nurturing, being carried out with perfect  regularity, 
and  everything,  even  minute  particles,  being  obedient  and  subjugated  to  those 
commands,  they indicate certainly the infinite extent of Your rule; and through every 
part  of  those trees and plants, like their leaves, blossoms, fruits, roots, branches, and 
twigs,  being  made  with  every  aspect  of  them  being  known  and  seen,  in  accordance 
with  useful  purposes,  instances  of  wisdom,  and  benefits,  they  point  clearly  with 
innumerable  fingers  to  Your  knowledge,  which  embraces  all  things,  and  to  the 
comprehensiveness of Your wisdom. With innumerable tongues, they praise and extol 
the utterly perfect beauty of Your art and the sheer beauty of Your perfect bestowal. 

Also, these precious gifts and bounties and this extraordinary outlay and bestowal, 
in this temporary hostel and transitory guest-house, for this brief time and fleeting life, 
indicate through the hands of the trees and plants, indeed, testify, that in order not to 
make all creatures say, contrary to the necessary result of all His expense and bestowal 
which is to make Himself  loved and known: “You gave us a taste, but then executed 
us  without  permitting  us  to  eat;”  and  not  to  nullify  the  sovereignty  of  His  Godhead, 
and  not  deny  His  infinite  mercy  and  make  it  denied,  and  in  order  not  to  turn  all  his 
yearning  friends  into  enemies  through  depriving  them  thus,  the  munificent  All-
Compassionate One has of a certainty prepared for His servants whom He will send to 
an  everlasting  realm,  an  eternal  world,  fruit-bearing  trees,  and  flowering  plants 
appropriate  to  Paradise  out  of  the  treasuries  of  His  mercy,  in  His  eternal  Paradises. 
Those here are merely samples to show the customers. 

Also,  just  as  through  the  words  of  their  leaves,  flowers  and  fruits,  the  trees  and 
plants praise, sanctify, and glorify You, so each one of those words singly declare You 
to be holy. The glorifications of fruits in partic 

 

63

ular  through the tongue of disposition —with the great variety of their original flesh, 
their  wondrous  art,  and  extraordinary  seeds,  and  those  trays  of  food  being  given  to 
hands  of  the  trees  and  placed  on  them,  and  sent  to  Your  living  guests—  their 
glorifications  are  so  evident  they  are  almost  verbal.  All  these  are  subjugated  and 
submissive  to  Your  command  in  Your  dominions  through  Your  power  and  strength, 
and Your wisdom and bestowal! 

O  Wise  Maker  and  Compassionate  Creator,  hidden  in  the  intensity  of  His 

manifestation and concealed within the magnificence of His grandeur! 

Through  the  tongues of all trees  and plants, and their leaves, flowers, and fruits, 
and  to  their  number,  I  praise  and  extol  You  and  declare  You  free  of  all  defect, 
impotence, and partners! 

O All-Powerful Creator! All-Wise Planner! Compassionate Nurturer! 
Through the instruction of Your  Most Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be 
upon  him)  and the teaching of the Wise Qur’an, I have understood  and believed that 
just  as  plants  and  trees  recognize  You  and  make  known  Your  sacred  attributes  and 
Beautiful  Names;  so  too  among  men  and  the  animals,  which  are  those  living 
creatures  which  have  spirits,  there  is  not  one  that  through  its  internal  and  external 
members,  which  work  as  regularly  as  clockwork,  and  the  extremely  fine  order  and 
balance  of  their  bodies,  and  the  significant  benefits  and  purposes  of  their  senses  and 
faculties,  and  the  great  art  in  their  making,  and  their  being  decked  out  with  much 
wisdom, and the precise equilibrium of their physical systems, but it testifies to Your 
necessary  existence  and  the  reality  of  Your  attributes.  For  blind  force,  unconscious 
nature,  and  aimless  chance  could  in  no  way  interfere  in  such  percipient,  delicate  art, 
and conscious subtle wisdom, and perfect providential balance; they could not be their 
work;  it  is  impossible.  It  is  also  utterly  impossible  that  living  creatures  made 
themselves,  for  then  each  of  their  particles  would  have  to  possess  comprehensive 
knowledge and wisdom like a god, to be able to know, see, and make all the parts of 
their  bodies  and  form  it,  indeed,  it  would  have  to  be  able  to  know,  see,  and  make 
everything in the world connected with it, then the body’s formation could be referred 
to it, and it could be said that “it makes itself.”  

Also,  their  being  subject  to  the  same  administration,  and  the  same planning, and 
their  all  being  the  same  kind,  and  their  bearing  the  same  stamp,  such  as  the 
resemblance  in  features  like  the  eye,  ear,  and  mouth,  and  the  unity  in  the  stamp  of 
wisdom observed on the faces of members of the same species, and the resemblance in 
livelihood and creation, and  

 

64

their  all  being  one  within  the  other;  there  is  not  one  of  these  circumstances  but  it 
testifies  categorically  to  Your  unity,  and,  by  the  manifestations  of  all  Your  Names 
which look to the universe being on each individual, to Your oneness within unity. 

Also,  through  being  equipped,  trained,  and  subservient  like  a  regular  army  and 
from the smallest to the largest, their conforming in orderly fashion to the commands 
of dominicality, man and the hundred thousand animal species on the face of the earth 
point  to  the  degree  of  splendour  of  that  dominicality;  and  through  their  great  value 
despite  their  great  multitude,  and  their  perfection  despite  the  speed  of  their  making, 
and their great art despite the ease of their making, to the degree of grandeur of Your 
power.  Also,  they  point  decisively  to  the  boundless  expanse  of  Your  mercy,  which 
sends  their  sustenance  to  all  of  them,  from  the  microbe  to  the  rhinoceros,  and  the 
tiniest  fly  to  the  largest  bird,  dispersed  from  east  to  west  and  north  to  south;  and 
through  all  of  them  performing  their  natural  functions  like  soldiers  under  command, 
and every spring the face of the earth  being the encampment of an army newly taken 
under arms in place of those discharged the previous autumn, to the infinite extent of 
Your sovereignty. 

Also, through a profound knowledge and precise wisdom all living creatures being 
miniature  copies  of  the  universe,  and  their  being  made  faultlessly,  with  none  of  their 
parts  being  confused  or  any  of  their  different  forms  mixed  up,  they  point  to  their 
number  to  Your  knowledge,  which  embraces  all  things,  and  Your  wisdom,  which 
comprehends  all  things;  while  by  their  all  being  made  so  beautiful  and  fine  as  to  be 
miracles of art and wonders of wisdom, they indicate in innumerable ways the utterly 
perfect beauty of Your dominical art, which You greatly love and want to exhibit; and 
through  all  of  them,  and  particularly  their  young,  being  nourished  in  the  finest  way, 
with their wishes and desires being satisfied, to the sweet beauty of Your grace. 

O  Most  Merciful  and  Compassionate!  O  One  Most  True  to  His  Promise! 

Owner of the Day of Judgement! 

Through the instruction of Your  Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon 
him)  and  the  guidance  of  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  I  have  understood  that  since  the 
choicest result of the universe is life, and the choicest essence of life is spirit, and the 
choicest  of  beings  with  spirits  are  intelligent  beings,  and of intelligent beings  the one 
with the most comprehensive nature is man; and since all the universe is subjugated to 
life and works for life, and living beings are subjugated to beings with spirits and they 
are sent to this world for them, and beings with spirits  

 

65

are subjugated to man and they assist him; and since by nature men earnestly love their 
Creator and their Creator both loves them, and by every means makes them love Him; 
and  since  man’s  innate  capacity  and  spiritual  faculties  look  to  another,  permanent 
world  and  everlasting  life,  and  his  heart  and  intelligence  desire  eternity  with  all  their 
strength,  and  his  tongue  beseeches  his  Creator  for  eternity  with  endless  prayers;  He 
surely would not offend men, who love Him greatly and are loved, by causing them to 
die then not raising them again to life, and while He created them for an eternal love, 
to make them feel eternal hostility; to do that would not be possible. Men were sent to 
work  in  this  world  in  order  to  live  happily in another, eternal world, and to win that 
life. The Names manifested on man in this brief and fleeting life indicate that men, who 
will be their mirrors in the eternal realm, will receive their eternal manifestations. 

Yes, the true friend of the Eternal One should be eternal, and the conscious mirror 

of the Enduring One should be enduring. 

It  is  understood  from  sound  narrations  that  the  spirits  of  animals  will  live 
eternally, and that certain individual animals, like the Hudhud of Solomon (PUH) and 
his ants, Salih’s (PUH) she-camel, and the dog of the Companions of the Cave, will go 
to the eternal realm with both their spirits and their bodies,4 and that each species will 
have  a  single  body  that  may  be  utilized  from  time  to  time.  This is also demanded by 
wisdom and reality, and mercy and dominicality. 
O All-Powerful Self-Subsistent One! 
All living creatures, beings with spirits, and conscious beings are subjugated to the 
commands  of  Your  dominicality  and  employed  in  their  innate  duties  only  through 
Your power and strength, Your will and planning, and Your mercy and wisdom. Some 
have  been  subjugated  to  man,  not  because  of  man’s  power  and  dominance,  but  by 
Divine mercy because of his innate weakness and impotence. Through the tongues of 
both disposition and speech they absolve their Maker and True Object of Worship of 
all  defect  and  partner,  and  offering  thanks  and  praise  for  His  bounties,  perform  the 
worship particular to them. 

O Most Pure and Holy One, hidden in the intensity of  His manifestation and 

concealed within the magnificence of His grandeur! 

Forming  the  intention,  I  sanctify  You  with  the  glorifications  of  all  beings  with 

spirits, and declare: Glory be to You Who has made from water all living things!5 

                                             

4 Bursawi, Ruh al-Bayan, v, 226; Tafsir al-Qurtubi, i, 372. 
5 Qur’an, 21:30. 

 

66

O Sustainer of All the Worlds! O God of the First-comers and the Last-comers! 

O Sustainer of the Heavens and the Earth! 

Through the instruction of Your  Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon 
him) and the teaching of the All-Wise Qur’an I have understood and believe that just 
as  the  heavens,  atmosphere,  earth,  land  and  sea,  trees,  plants,  and  animals,  together 
with all their members, parts, and particles, know and recognize You and point to and 
testify  to  Your  existence  and  unity; so too living beings, the essence of the universe, 
and  man,  the  essence  of  living  creatures,  and  the  prophets,  saints,  and  purified 
scholars, the essence of men, and, through their visions, unfoldings, inspirations, and 
the discoveries of their hearts and intellects, which form the essence of the prophets, 
saints,  and  purified  scholars,  testify  with  the  certainty  of  a  hundredfold  consensus  to 
Your necessary existence, unity and oneness, and give news of them; and through their 
miracles, wonder-working, and certain proofs, prove what they tell of. 

Yes, there is nothing that occurs to the heart, which looks to one who inspires it 
from behind the veil of the Unseen; and there is no inspiration, which makes one look 
to the giver of inspiration; and there is no certain belief, which discloses in the form of 
‘absolute certainty’ Your sacred attributes and Most Beautiful Names; and there is no 
luminous heart of the prophets and saints, which observes with ‘the vision of certainty’ 
the lights of the Necessary Existent; and there is no enlightened intellect of the purified 
scholars  and  veracious  ones,  which  confirms  and  proves  with  ‘the  knowledge  of 
certainty’ the signs of the existence of the Creator of All Things and the proofs of His 
unity; —there is not one of these that does not testify to Your necessary existence, and 
sacred  attributes,  and  Your  unity,  oneness,  and  Most  Beautiful  Names,  and  point  to 
them and indicate them. 

Also,  just  as  relying  on  their  miracles,  wonder-working  and  proofs,  all  those 
hundreds of thousands of truthful bringers of good news testify to Your existence and 
unity; so they unanimously give news of, proclaim, and prove the degree of majesty of 
Your dominicality, which governs from the administration of the totality of matters of 
the  Sublime  Throne,  which  encompasses  all  things,  to  knowing  and  hearing  and 
administering  the  secret,  private  thoughts  of  the  heart,  and  its  desires  and 
supplications. They tell of and prove too the immensity of Your power, which creates 
innumerable  different  things  at  once,  and  makes  the  greatest  thing  as  easily  as  the 
smallest with no act impeding another and no matter obstructing another. 
Also, they give news of and prove through their miracles and proofs  

 

67

the  immense  breadth  of  Your  mercy,  which  makes  the  universe  a  magnificent  palace 
for  beings  with  spirits,  and  especially  man;  has  prepared  Paradise  and  everlasting 
happiness  for  jinn  and  man;  does  not forget even the tiniest living being; and tries to 
satisfy and please the most impotent heart.  

They  give  news  too  of  the  infinite  extent  of  Your  sovereignty,  which  makes 
comply with Your commands all the realms of creatures from particles to the planets, 
and subjugates and employs them.  

So also they unanimously testify to Your comprehensive knowledge, which makes 
the  universe  into  a  vast  book  containing  treatises  to  the  numbers  of  its  parts,  and 
records the life-stories of all beings in the Clear Record and Clear Book, which are the 
notebooks of the Preserved Tablet, and inscribes completely and without error in their 
seeds the indexes and programmes of all trees and the biographies of conscious beings 
in the memories in their heads.  

They testify too to the comprehensiveness of Your sacred wisdom, which attaches 
numerous purposes to all beings, causing even trees to produce results to the number 
of their fruits, and follows benefits in all living beings to the number of their members, 
and even their parts and cells, and employing man’s tongue in numerous duties, equips 
it with the ability to weigh up tastes to the number of foods.  

They  also  unanimously  testify  that  the  manifestations  of  the  Names  related  to 
Your Beauty and Glory, samples of which are to be seen in this world, will continue in 
more brilliant fashion for all eternity, and that your bounties, samples of which are to 
be  observed  in  this  transitory  world,  will  persist  in  the  abode  of  bliss  in  even  more 
glittering fashion, and that those who long for them in this world will accompany them 
and be together with them for all eternity. 

Also,  relying  on hundreds of evident miracles and decisive signs, foremost Your 
Most  Noble  Messenger  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him)  and  the  All-Wise 
Qur’an,  and  the  prophets  with  their  luminous  spirits,  and  the  saints,  who  are 
spiritual  poles  with  their  light-filled  hearts,  and  the  purified  scholars  with  their 
enlightened intellects, relying on Your repeated threats and promises in all the sacred 
scriptures, and trusting in Your sacred attributes, like power, mercy, favour, wisdom, 
glory,  and  beauty,  and  on  Your  functions,  and  the  dignity  of  Your  glory,  and  the 
sovereignty of Your dominicality, and in consequence of their illuminations and visions 
and beliefs at the degree of ‘the knowledge of certainty,’ give the glad tidings to men 
and  jinn  of  eternal  happiness and inform them of Hell for the people of misguidance; 
they believe this and testify to it. 

 

68

O  All-Powerful  and  Wise  One!  O  Most  Merciful  and  Compassionate!  O 
Munificent  One  True  to  His  Promise!  O  All-Compelling  One  of  Glory,  One  of 
Dignity, Grandeur, and Wrath! 

You  are  utterly  exempt  from  and  exalted  above  giving  the  lie  to  so  many  loyal 
friends,  and  so  many  promises,  and  attributes  and  functions,  and  denying  the  certain 
demands  of  the  sovereignty  of  Your  dominicality  and  the  endless  prayers  and 
supplications  of  Your  innumerable  acceptable  servants,  whom  You  love  and  who 
attract  Your  love  by  assenting  to  You  and  obeying  You;  and  You  are  exempt  from 
confirming  the  denial  of  resurrection of the people of misguidance and unbelief, who 
through  their  disbelief  and  rebellion  and  denial  of  Your  promises,  offend  the 
magnificence of Your grandeur and affront Your dignity and glory and the honour of 
Your  Godhead,  and  sadden  the  compassion  of  Your  dominicality.  I  declare  Your 
justice, beauty, and mercy to be exempt from such infinite tyranny, such ugliness. With 
all the particles of my being, I want to recite the verse, 

Glory  be  to  Him!  He  is  high  above  all  that  they  say!  —Exalted  and  Great 
[beyond measure]!6 

Indeed,  those  truthful  envoys  of  Yours  and  heralds  of  Your  sovereignty  testify 
with ‘absolute certainty,’ ‘knowledge of certainty,’ and ‘the vision of certainty’ to the 
treasuries  of  Your  mercy  in  the  hereafter  and  the  stores  of  Your  bounties  in  the 
everlasting  realm,  and  to  the  wondrously  beautiful  manifestations  of  Your  Beautiful 
Names, which will be manifested totally in the abode of bliss, and they give good news 
of these. Believing that the supreme ray of Your Name of Truth, which is the source, 
sun, and protector of all realities, is this truth of the resurrection and Great Gathering, 
they teach it to Your servants. 

O Sustainer of the Prophets and Veracious Ones! 
They are all subservient to You and charged with their duties in Your dominions 
through  Your  command  and  power,  Your  will  and  planning,  Your  knowledge  and 
wisdom.  They  demonstrate  through  sanctifying,  exalting,  and  extolling  You,  and 
declaring You to be One, that the globe is a vast place for Your remembrance and the 
universe, a huge mosque. 

O My Sustainer and Sustainer of the Heavens and Earth! O My Creator and 
Creator  of  All  Things!  For  the  sake  of  Your  power,  will,  wisdom, 
sovereignty,  and  mercy,  which  subjugate  the  heavens  and  their  stars,  the 
earth and all it contains, and all creatures together with all their attributes 
and acts, subject my soul to me and subjugate to me  

                                             

6 Qur’an, 17:43. 

 

69

my  wishes!  Subjugate  the  hearts  of  people  to  the  Risale-i Nur, so they may 
serve  the  Qur’an  and  belief!  And  grant  me  and  my  brothers  perfect  belief 
and  a  happy  death!  As  You  subjugated  the  sea  to  Moses  (Peace  be  upon 
him), fire to Abraham (Peace be upon him), the mountains and iron to David 
(Peace be upon him), jinn and men to Solomon (Peace be upon him), and the 
sun and moon to Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), subjugate 
hearts and minds to the Risale-i Nur! Preserve me and all the students of the 
Risale-i Nur from the evil of the soul and Satan, and the torment of the grave 
and Hell-fire, and grant us happiness in Paradise! Amen. Amen. Amen. 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.7 

And the close of their prayer will be: All praise be to God, the Sustainer of 
All the Worlds.8 

If I have been at fault in offering to the Court of my Compassionate Sustainer this 
instructive  piece  which  I  have  taken  from  the  Qur’an  and  the  Jawshan  al-Kabir,  a 
supplication  of  the  Prophet  (PBUH),  as  worship  in  the  form  of  reflective  thought, 
making  the  Qur’an  and  the  Jawshan  my  intercessors,  I  beseech  forgiveness  for  my 
fault. 

                                                                           S a i d  N u r s i  

                                             

7 Qur’an, 2:32. 
8 Qur’an, 10:10. 

 

70

The Fourth Ray 

 [While  being  the  Fifth  Flash  in  meaning  and  degree,  in  form  and  ‘station’ 
this  forms  the  valuable  Fourth  Ray  of  the Thirty-First Letter’s Thirty-First 
Flash and is an important and subtle point concerning the verse, For us God 
suffices.] 

NOTE: Unlike other works, the Risale-i Nur starts off in veiled manner and gradually 
unfolds. Especially the First Degree of this treatise, in addition to being a most valuable 
truth,  it  is  extremely  subtle  and  profound.  Peculiar  to  myself,  it  took  the  form  of  a 
significant discussion governed by the feelings, an animated conversation about belief, a 
secret  discourse  of  the  heart;  it  was  healing  for  my  various  deep  ills.  Those  who  are 
completely in harmony and agreement with me may understand it. Otherwise it will not 
be entirely appreciated. 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs.1 

One  time  when  I  had  been  isolated  from  everything  by  ‘the  worldly’,  I  was 
afflicted  with  five  kinds  of  exile.  I  suffered  too  at  that  time  of  old  age  from  five 
illnesses  arising  in  part  from  my  sorrows.  Due  to the heedlessness resulting from the 
distress, I looked not to the lights of the Risale-i Nur, which would have consoled and 
assisted me, but straight to my heart, and I sought my spirit. I saw that dominant in me 
were  an  overpowering  desire  for  immortality,  an  intense  love  of  existence,  a  great 
yearning  for  life,  together  with  an  infinite  impotence  and  endless  want.  But  an 
awesome transience was extinguishing the immortality. Suffering that state of mind, I 
exclaimed like the sorrowing poet:2 

                                             

1 Qur’an, 3:173. 
2 This refers to Niyazi al-Misri (1218-1294 AD), a sufi poet who was born in the province of 
Malatya in Turkey. He studied in al-Azhar, hence the name ‘al-Misri,’ wrote a diwan of poetry and 
other works, and taught in the religious schools of Istanbul for many years. [Tr.] 

 

71

While  my  heart  desires  its  immortality,  Reality  wants  the  passing  of  my 
body;  
I am afflicted with an incurable ill which not even Luqman could cure! 

I bowed my head in despair. Suddenly the verse, For us God suffices, and He is 
the  Best  Disposer  of  Affairs  came  to  my  assistance,  summoning  me  to  read  it  with 
attention.  So  I  recited  it  five  hundred  times  every  day.  Writing  briefly  a  part  of  the 
valuable lights which were unfolded to me in the form of ‘the vision of certainty’, and 
only nine lights and degrees, I refer readers to the Risale-i Nur for the details, known 
with ‘absolute certainty’ rather than the former ‘vision of certainty.’ 

The First Degree of the Luminous Verse ‘For us God suffices’ 

Because of a shadow in my essential being of a manifestation of one of the Names 
of the One of Glory and Perfection, Who, possessing absolute perfection, is of Himself 
and for no other reason worthy of love, I had an innate desire for immortality, directed 
not  to  my  own  immortality,  but  to  the  existence,  perfection,  and  immortality  of  that 
Absolutely  Perfect  One.  However,  due  to  heedlessness,  that  innate  love  had  lost  its 
way,  become  attached  to  the  shadow  and  enamoured  of  the  mirror  of  immortality. 
Then the verse, For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs raised the 
veil.  I  saw  and  felt  and  experienced  at  the  degree  of  ‘absolute  certainty’  that  the 
pleasure  and happiness of my immortality lay exactly and in more perfect form in the 
immortality of the Enduring One of Perfection, in affirming my Sustainer and God, in 
believing in Him and submitting to Him. For an undying truth was realized through His 
immortality. The insight of belief established that “my essential being is the shadow of 
a Divine Name which is both enduring and eternal.” 

Also,  through  the  insight  of  belief,  one  knows  the  existence  of  the  Absolutely 
Perfect  One,  the One Who is absolutely beloved, and the innate, intense love for His 
Essence is satisfied. And through perceiving through the insight of belief the Eternally 
Enduring  One’s  eternal  existence, the perfections of the universe and of mankind  are 
known  and  exist,  and  one’s  natural  infatuation  with  perfection  is  saved  from  endless 
pains and becomes the means to pleasure and enjoyment. 

Also,  through  the  insight  of  belief  a  connection  is  formed  with  the  Eternally 
Enduring One, and through belief in that connection a relation comes into being with 
all His dominions. And due to that connection and relation —with the eye of belief— 
one looks on infinite dominions as though they were in a way one’s own possessions, 
and benefits from them. 

 

72

Also,  through  the  insight  of  belief  and  that  connection  and  relation,  a  bond  is 
formed  with all beings, a sort of union is attained with them. In this way, apart from 
one’s  personal  existence  in  second  place,  through  the  insight  of  belief  and  that 
connection, relation, bond and union, a boundless existence comes into being which is 
as though one’s own; and one’s innate passionate love of existence is quietened. 

Also,  through  that  insight  of  belief,  and  the  connection,  relation,  and  bond,  a 
brotherhood  is  formed  with  all  the  people of perfection. Thus, through knowing that 
due to the eternal existence of the Eternally Enduring One those innumerable people of 
perfection  have  not  gone  to  nothingness  and  are  not  lost,  the  immortality  and 
continued  existence  of  those  innumerable  friends’  perfections,  whom  such  a  person 
with the insight of belief loves, admires, and appreciates and to whom he is attached, 
yields an elevated pleasure for him. 

Also, through that insight of belief, connection, relation, bond, and brotherhood, I 
felt  and  experienced  in  myself  an  infinite happiness at the happiness of all my friends 
—for  whose  happiness  I  would  willingly  sacrifice  my  life  and  immortality.  For  one 
kind friend is happy and pleased at the happiness of his sincere friend. I therefore felt 
and  perceived  through  the  insight  of  belief  that  through  the  eternal  existence  of  the 
Enduring  One  of  Perfection,  foremost  the  Noble  Messenger  (Peace  and  blessings  be 
upon  him)  and  his  Family  and  Companions,  and  all  my masters and those I love, the 
prophets, saints, and purified scholars, and all my other innumerable friends, had been 
saved  from  eternal  extinction  and  would  experience  eternal  happiness.  I  understood 
through  the  mystery  of  relations,  bonds,  brotherhood,  and  friendship  that  their 
happiness was reflected in me and made me happy. 

Also, through the insight of belief, I was saved from endless sorrows arising from 
love  of  my  fellow  men  and  love  for  relatives,  and  felt a  boundless  spiritual  pleasure. 
For I felt and perceived through the insight of belief that foremost my parents and all 
my blood relatives and relatives of the spirit, for whom by nature I desired to sacrifice 
my  life  and  immortality,  and  would  proudly  do  so,  were  saved  through  the  eternal 
existence  of  the  Truly  Enduring  One  from  annihilation,  non-existence,  eternal 
annihilation,  and  endless  pains,  and  would  receive  His  infinite  mercy.  I  felt  and 
perceived  that  an  infinite  mercy  was  protecting  and  supervising  them  in  place  of  my 
insignificant, ineffective compassion, which  produces sorrow and pain. Like a mother 
takes pleasure at the ease, comfort, and enjoyment of her child, I felt pleasure and joy 
at  the  salvation  and  ease  of  all  those  persons  for  whom  I  had  compassion  under  the 
protection of that mercy, and I offered profound thanks. 

 

73

Also, through the insight of belief, and through its connection, I knew and felt that 
the  Risale-i  Nur,  which  was  the  result  of  my  life,  means  of  my  happiness,  and  my 
natural duty, was saved from being lost and without benefit and from annihilation and 
losing its meaning, and that it was fruitful and enduring; I had the conviction that this 
was so and I experienced a pleasure of the spirit far exceeding the pleasure at my own 
immortality.  For  I  believed  that  through  the  Enduring  One  of  Perfection’s  eternal 
existence,  the  Risale-i  Nur  was  not  only  inscribed  in  the  hearts  and  memories  of 
people,  but  was  studied  by  innumerable  sentient  creatures  and  spirit  beings,  and  in 
addition,  receiving  God’s  pleasure,  was  inscribed  on  the  Preserved  Tablet,  and 
guarded records, and adorned with fruits of reward. I knew that in particular its being 
connected  with  the  Qur’an,  and  its  acceptance  by  the  Prophet  (PBUH),  and  —God 
willing—  being  the  object  of Divine pleasure, one moment of its existence and being 
under the dominical view was far more valuable than the appreciation of all the people 
of this world. 

Thus,  I  realized  that  I  am  ever-ready  to  sacrifice  my life and immortality for  the 
immortality, continuance, statement, and acceptance of each of  those treatises, which 
prove the truths of belief, and that my happiness lies in their serving the Qur’an. In this 
way  I  understood  through  the  connection  of  belief  that  through  Divine  immortality, 
they  are  the  object  of  appreciation  a  hundred  times  greater  than  the  appreciation  of 
men.  I  exclaimed  with  all  my  strength:  “For  us  God  suffices,  and  He  is  the  Best 
Disposer of Affairs!” 

Also, through the insight of belief I knew that belief in the eternal existence of the 
Enduring  One  of  Glory,  Who  bestows everlasting  immortality and perpetual life, and 
the results of belief like good works, are the  everlasting fruits of this fleeting life and 
the means to unending immortality. I persuaded my soul to leave aside the shell of this 
worldly immortality in order to yield those enduring fruits, like a seed leaves aside its 
casing  in  order  to  be  transformed  into  a  fruit-bearing  tree.  Together  with  my  soul  I 
said: “For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs! For us His eternal 
existence is sufficient!” 

Also,  through  the  insight  of  belief  and  relation  of  worship  I  knew  with  ‘the 
knowledge  of  certainty’  that  what  lies  beyond  the  screen  of  the  earth  was  lit  up  and 
that  the  heavy  layer  of  earth  was  lifted  from  the  dead,  and  that  under  the  ground, 
which  was  entered  by  the  door  of  the  grave,  was  not  dark  and  stained  with  non-
existence. With all my strength I exclaimed:“For us God suffices, and He is the Best 
Disposer of Affairs!” 

I had the firm conviction and through the insight of belief knew with  

 

74

‘absolute certainty’ that while the intense desire for immortality looked in two respects 
to  the  eternal  existence  of  the  Enduring  One  of  Perfection,  I  had  become  someone 
stunned and bewildered who had lost his beloved on his ego veiling him and begun to 
worship the mirror itself. That very deep, powerful desire for immortality governed in 
my  essential  being  by  means  of  the  shadow  of  one  of  the  Names  of  the  Absolute 
Perfection, Who is loved and worshipped for Himself and no other reason, and Whom 
it  is  man’s  nature  to  love.  He  had  given  the  desire  for  immortality,  and  while  the 
perfection  of  His  Essence,  which  apart  from  Himself  requires  no  other  reason  or 
motive  for  love,  was  sufficient  as  the  cause  of  worship,  as  we  explained  above,  by 
bestowing  the  above-mentioned  enduring  fruits  —each  one  of  which  is  worthy  of 
having  sacrificed  for  it  not  one  life  and  immortality,  but  if  possible  thousands  of 
worldly  lives  and  immortalities—  He  had  made  that  innate  desire  even more intense; 
this I perceived and felt. If it had been within my power I would have declared with all 
the  particles  of  my  being:  “For  us  God  suffices,  and  He  is  the  Best  Disposer  of 
Affairs!”, and I did declare it with that intention.  

Also, the insight of belief, which seeks its immortality and the eternal existence of 
God  —some  of  the  fruits  of  which  I  have  indicated  above  in  the paragraphs starting 
“Also... Also... Also... ” — afforded me such pleasure and joy that I exclaimed with all 
my spirit, all my strength, from the depths of my heart, together with my soul: “For us 
God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs!” 

The Second Degree of the Luminous Verse ‘For us God suffices’ 

One time when afflicted with old age, exile, loneliness, and isolation in addition to 
my innate and infinite impotence, ‘the worldly’ were attacking me with their spies and 
stratagems,  and  I  declared:  “Armies  are  attacking  a  single  sick,  weak  man  whose 
hands are tied. Is there nothing that unfortunate (that is, me) can find to support him?” 
I  had  recourse  to  the  verse  For  us  God  suffices,  and  He  is  the  Best  Disposer  of 
Affairs!  It  told  me:  through  the  relation  resulting  from  belief  you  may  rely  on  a 
monarch so absolutely powerful that together with every spring equipping with perfect 
order all the armies of the plants and animals on the face of the earth, which comprise 
four  hundred  thousand  nations,  he  renews  the  uniforms  of the  two  regular  armies  of 
the  trees  and  flying  creatures,  clothing  them  in  fresh  apparel  and  changing  the  skirts 
and top garments of the hens and birds. He changes too the dress of the mountains and 
the veil of the plains. 

Furthermore, this Monarch places all the rations of the vast army of foremost man 
and all the animals in the merciful ‘extracts’ known as seeds and grains, which are far 
more wondrous than the ‘food extracts’  

 

75

like the meat, sugar and other extracts the ‘civilized’ have discovered in recent times. 
He  rolls  up  inside  these  the  instructions  for  their  cooking  and  growth  in  accordance 
with  Divine  Determining,  depositing them in minute casings for their protection. The 
creation of these containers is with such speed, ease and abundance from the factory of 
“‘Be!’ and it is”3 that the Qur’an says it is carried out at a mere command. Although 
all those extracts resemble each other and are of the same matter and would not fill a 
town, the Munificent Provider could fill all the towns on the earth with the exceedingly 
various and delicious foods He cooks from them in the summer. 

Thus, you may find a point of support such as this through the relation of belief, 

and rely on an infinite power and strength. 

On  receiving  this  lesson  from  the  verse,  I  acquired  such  moral  strength  and 
firmness  of  belief  that  I  could  have  challenged  not  only  my  present  enemies,  but  the 
whole  world.  I  declared:  “For  us  God  suffices,  and  He  is  the  Best  Disposer  of 
Affairs!” 

Seeking a source of help for my infinite poverty and need, I again had recourse to 
the verse. It said to me: through the relation of worship and servanthood you become 
connected to and are recorded in the wages book of a Munificent Master Who every 
spring  and  summer  sets  out  and  removes  a  hundred  times  over  tables  bearing  a 
multiplicity  of  foods,  producing them out of nothing from unexpected places and the 
dry  earth.  It  is  as  though  the  years  and  the  days  are  all  receptacles  for  the  fruits  of 
bounty  and  foods  of  mercy  that  appear  in  unending  succession.  They  are  exhibitions 
for  the  degrees  of  bestowal,  universal  and  particular,  of  a  Compassionate  Provider. 
You are the servant of a Possessor of Absolute Riches Who is thus. If you are aware 
of  your  servanthood,  your  grievous  poverty  will  be  transformed  into  pleasurable 
appetite. This lesson I absorbed, and placing my trust in God, declared together with 
my soul: “Yes, yes! That is right! For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of 
Affairs!” 

The Third Degree of the Luminous Verse ‘For us God suffices’ 

At a time I found my attachment to the world broken due to the pressures of my 
exile and sickness, and the wrongs I suffered, and belief was informing me that I was 
destined  for an eternal world, an everlasting land, and perpetual happiness, I gave up 
sighing “ah! ah!” and said “oh! oh!” But this goal of the imagination, aim of the spirit, 
and  result  of  creation  could  only  be  achieved  through  the  infinite  power  of  One 
Absolutely  

                                             

3 Qur’an, 36:82, etc. 

 

76

Omnipotent Who knows the motion, rest, acts and states of all creatures, and records 
them, and takes insignificant and absolutely impotent man as his friend and addressee, 
giving  him  a  rank  over  all  creatures.  Thinking  of  this  and  His  attaching  infinite 
importance  to  man  and  bestowing  infinite  grace  on  him,  that  is,  pondering  over  the 
activity  of  such  a  power  and  man’s  importance  despite  his  apparent  insignificance,  I 
wanted an explanation that would increase my belief and satisfy my mind. I again had 
recourse  to  the  verse.  It  commanded  me:  “Note  carefully  the  ‘us’  of  For  us  God 
suffices and see who is saying this together with you verbally and through the tongue 
of disposition.” 

So  I  looked  and  I  at  once  saw  that  innumerable  birds  and  miniature  birds  and 
flying  creatures,  and  countless  animals  and  small  living  creatures,  and  uncountable 
plants  and  growing  things,  and  infinite  numbers  of  trees  and  bushes,  like  me,  were 
reciting through the tongue of disposition the meaning of For us God suffices, and He 
is  the  Best  Disposer  of  Affairs!,  and  were  calling  it  to  mind.  For  the  One  Who  has 
disposal  over  them  and  guarantees  all  the  necessities  of  their  lives  is  such  that  He 
creates before our eyes and particularly in the spring in great abundance and with great 
ease  and  speed  and  extensiveness,  without  error,  defect,  or  confusion,  from  eggs, 
droplets of fluid, seeds and grains which resemble each other and whose matter is the 
same,  the  adorned,  balanced,  and  regular  hundred  thousand  species  of  birds,  the 
hundred  thousand  sorts  of  animals,  the  hundred  thousand  varieties  of  plants, and the 
hundred thousand kinds of trees, which, all with their distinguishing characteristics, are 
different  to  each  other.  With  all  this  intermingling,  resemblance,  and  closeness,  He 
demonstrates  to  us  His  unity  and  oneness  within  the  immensity  and  majesty  of  His 
power.  I  understood  then  that  it  was  not  possible  for  there to be any interference or 
partnership in that act of dominicality and disposal of creative power, which displayed 
such innumerable miracles. 

I noted next the ‘I’ in the For us God suffices, that is, I considered myself, and I 
saw that among the animals, He had created me miraculously from my origin, a drop 
of fluid, had opened my ear, attached my eye, and had placed in my head a brain, and 
in  my  breast  a  heart,  and  in  my  mouth  a  tongue  containing  hundreds  of  scales  and 
measures  with  which  I  might  weigh  up  and know  all  the  gifts  of  that  Most  Merciful 
One  stored  up  in  the  treasuries  of  mercy.  He  had  inscribed  on  these,  thousands  of 
instruments for unlocking and understanding the treasures of the infinite manifestations 
of  His  Most  Beautiful Names, and given instructions to the number of smells, tastes, 
and colours for the assistance of those instruments. 

 

77

He had moreover included with perfect order in this body the numerous sensitive 
feelings and senses, and subtle, non-physical faculties and inner senses. He had created 
with perfect art all the systems and members and faculties necessary for human life so 
that He might allow me to experience and understand all the varieties of His bounties, 
and make known to me the countless different manifestations of His Names. Like the 
bodies  of  all  believers,  He  had  made  this  poor  body  of  mine,  which  appears  so 
insignificant, a fine calendar and diary of the universe; an illuminated summary of the 
macrocosm;  a  miniature  sample  of  the  world;  a  clear  miracle  of  His  handicraft;  a 
desirous seeker after every sort of His bounty, and the means of enjoying them; and a 
list  and  index,  like  a  model  garden,  of  the  gifts  and  flowers  of  mercy;  and  the 
understanding  recipient  of  His Divine pronouncements.  He also had given me  life, to 
expand and increase in my existence, which is the greatest bounty. For through life, the 
bounty of my existence may expand to the extent of the Manifest World. 

He  had  also  bestowed  humanity  on  me,  through  which  the  bounty  of  existence 
may  unfold  in  the  physical  and  spiritual  realms,  opening  up  the  way  to  benefiting  —
through the senses particular to man— from those broad spreads of bounties. 

He  had  also  bestowed  Islam  on  me,  through  which  the  bounty  of  existence may 

expand to the extent of the Manifest World and World of the Unseen. 

He  had  also  given  me  certain,  verified  belief,  through  which  the  bounty  of 

existence may encompass this world and the hereafter. 

He had also given me the knowledge and love of God within belief. Through this 
He bestowed a rank through the bounty of existence at which one may stretch out the 
hands to reap benefits, through praise and laudation, at all the levels from the sphere of 
contingency to the Necessary World and realm of the Divine Names.  

He  had  also  given  me  in  particular  knowledge  of  the Qur’an  and  the wisdom of 
belief,  through  which  bounty  He  had  bestowed  on  me  a  superiority  over  many 
creatures. 

He had also given me comprehensive abilities like the above-mentioned whereby I 
might be a complete mirror to His oneness and Eternal Besoughtedness, and respond 
with universal worship to His universal, sacred dominicality. 

And  as  unanimously  confirmed  by  all  the  holy  scriptures  and  books  He  had 
revealed to men by means of the prophets, and attested by all the prophets, saints, and 
purified ones, He buys from me my existence, life,  

 

78

and  self  —as  stated  by  verses of the Qur’an— which are gifts and in trust to me, so 
that  they  will  not  be  lost  and  go  for  nothing.  He  has  repeatedly  and  categorically 
promised that He will preserve them in order to return them, and that as the price He 
will  give  eternal  happiness  and  Paradise.  This  I  understood  with  ‘the  knowledge  of 
certainty’ and believed with utter conviction. 

Thus,  I  was  taught  by  the  verse  For  us  God  suffices  that  my  Sustainer,  the 
Glorious  and  Munificent  One,  ‘opens  up’  through  His  Name  of Opener the forms of 
the  hundreds  of  thousands  of  varieties  of  animals  and  plants  from  limited,  similar 
droplets  and  seeds,  with  the  uttermost  ease,  speed,  and  perfection,  and  as  we 
mentioned  before,  gives  man  this astonishing importance, making him the chief pivot 
of the works of His dominicality; so too He will create the resurrection of the dead and 
Paradise  and  will  bestow  eternal  happiness  as  easily  and  definitely  as  He  will  create 
next spring. Had it had been possible, I would have declared through the tongues of all 
creatures,  but  since  it  was  not  possible,  I  declared  by  intention  and  through  thought 
and imagination: For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs!  And so 
I want to repeat it through all eternity. 

The Fourth Degree of the Luminous Verse ‘For us God suffices’ 

One  time,  when  a  period  of  heedlessness  coincided  with  my  being  shaken  by 
various  indispositions  like  old  age,  exile,  illness,  and  defeat,  I  was  overcome  by  a 
grievous  anxiety  that  my  very  existence,  to  which  I  was  intensely  attached  and  by 
which  I  was  captivated,  would  cease  to  be,  as  would  the  existences  of  all  creatures. 
Again I had recourse to the verse For us God suffices. It told me: “Study my meaning 
and look through the telescope of belief!” 

I  looked  and  I  saw  through  the  eyes  of  belief  that  my  miniscule  being  was  the 
mirror  to  an  infinite  existence,  and  through  an  infinite  expansion  was  the  means  of 
gaining  innumerable  existences;  it  was  a  word  of  wisdom  yielding  the  fruits  of 
numerous  everlasting  existences  far  surpassing  itself  in  value.  I  understood  with  ‘the 
knowledge  of certainty’ that due to its relation with that infinite existence, to live for 
an  instant  was  as  valuable  as  existing  eternally.  For  by  understanding  through  the 
insight  of  belief  that  my  being  is  the  work,  artefact  and  manifestation  of  the 
Necessarily Existent, I was saved from the endless darkness of desolate fears and the 
pains  of  innumerable  separations.  I  knew  that  within  a  temporary  separation  was  a 
permanent union with the beings I loved, with which, through bonds of brotherhood to 
the  number  of  Divine  Names  manifested  in  the  acts  related  to  living  creatures  in 
particular, I had gained a relation.  

 

79

It  is  clear  that  those  who  share  the  same  village,  town  or  country,  or  the  same 
regiment,  commander,  or  master  will  feel  a  close  brotherhood  and  warm  friendship. 
While  those  deprived  of  such  bonds  feel  a  constant  painful  torment  surrounded  by 
darkness.  The fruits of a tree, too, if they had intelligence, would  feel  that they  were 
brothers, companions, and observers of each other. If the tree ceased to exist or they 
were plucked from it, they would experience separations to the number of fruits. 

Thus, through belief and the relation that results from it, my existence —like that 
of all believers— gains the lights of myriad existences untouched by separation. Even 
if it departs itself, it is content, for they remain behind as though it had itself remained. 
Moreover, as is demonstrated in detail in the Twenty-Fourth Letter, the existences of 
all living creatures and particularly those with spirits, are like words. They are spoken 
and  written  down,  then  disappear.  But  in  place  of  their  own  existences,  they  leave 
behind  numerous  existences  which  may be  counted  as second  degree existences, like 
their  meanings,  their  similitudes  and  forms,  and  their  results,  and  if  they  are  blessed, 
their rewards and their realities. Only then do they pass beneath the veil.  

In just the same way, when they depart from external existence, my existence and 
the  existences  of  all  living  creatures,  leave  behind  them  their  spirits,  if  they  possess 
them,  and  their  meanings,  and  realities,  and  similitudes,  and  the  worldly  results  and 
fruits of the hereafter produced by them individually; they leave their forms and their 
identities behind in memories and on the Preserved Tablet, and in the films displaying 
eternal  vistas,  and  in  the  exhibitions  of  pre-eternal  knowledge;  and  they  leave  the 
Divine  glorifications  offered  by  their  essential  beings,  which  represent  them  and  give 
them  permanence,  in  the  notebooks  of  their  deeds;  and  their  innate  responses  to  the 
manifestations  of  the  Divine  Names  and  what  the  Names  necessitate, and their being 
existent mirrors to them, they leave in the sphere of the Names. They leave behind in 
their  places  numerous  non-physical  existences  like  these,  more  valuable  than  their 
external existences, then they depart. This I knew with ‘the knowledge of certainty.’ 

Thus, through belief and the insight and relationship resulting from belief, one may 
lay claim to the above-mentioned everlasting, immaterial existences. In the absence of 
belief,  besides being deprived of all those other existences, even one’s own existence 
goes for nothing, for oneself, and is lost in non-existence. 

At one time, I felt great sorrow at the speedy destruction of the spring flowers; I 

even pitied those delicate creatures. But the above-mentioned  

 

80

truth  arising  from  belief  shows  that  such  flowers  become  flowers  in  the  world  of 
meaning.  Each  like  a  fruit-producing  tree  or  a  shoot,  —in  respect  of  the  lights  of 
existence—  all  those  existences  apart from spirit produce a  hundredfold profit. Their 
external existences do not go to non-existence, they are hidden. They are also the new 
forms  of  the permanent  reality  of  a  species.  For  the beings of last spring such as  the 
leaves,  flowers, and fruits, are the same as those of this spring; the difference is only 
apparent.  I  realized  that  the  apparent  difference,  even,  was  to  allow  those  words  of 
wisdom,  phrases  of  mercy,  and  letters  of  power  to  acquire  numerous  different 
meanings.  Instead  of  lamenting,  I  exclaimed:  “What  wonders  God  has  willed!  How 
great are His blessings!” 

Thus,  through  the  insight  of  belief  and  by  being  connected  through  belief  to  the 
Maker  of  the  heavens  and  earth,  I  perceived  from  afar  what  a  source  of  pride  and 
honour it is to be the work of art of a craftsman who adorns the skies with stars and 
the earth with flowers and exquisite creatures, and demonstrates a hundred miracles in 
every one of his artefacts—how precious and unique it was to have been made by such 
a  wondrous  artist.  The  verse  taught  me  in  particular  that  since  that  wonder-working 
Artist had inscribed in the tiny copy of man the mighty book of the vast heavens and 
earth,  even  making  him  a  choice  and  perfect  summary  of  the  book,  what  a  great 
honour and achievement and way of acquiring value it was for man, and that through 
the  relation  and  insight  of  belief,  he  could  receive  and  lay  claim  to  that  honour. 
Conceiving of all beings in my mind, I formed the intention and declared through the 
tongues of all of them: “For us God suffices; and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs!” 

The Fifth Degree of the Luminous Verse ‘For us God suffices’ 

Another  time  when  my  life  was  being  shaken  by  severe  conditions,  it  turned  my 
attention towards life and I saw that mine was swiftly passing. I was approaching the 
end  of  my  life;  it  had  begun  to  be  dimmed  with  the  oppression  I  suffered.  But  I 
thought  sorrowfully  of  how,  because  of  its important duties and virtues and valuable 
benefits,  which  are  explained  in  the  treatise  on  the  Divine  Name  of  Ever-Living,  life 
deserved  to  be  very  lengthy,  not  to  be  swiftly extinguished in that way. I once again 
had recourse to my master, the verse For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer 
of  Affairs!,  and  it  told  me:  “Consider  life  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Ever-Living 
and Self-Subsistent One, Who gives you life!” So I considered it and I understood that 
if one aspect of life looks to me, one hundred aspects look to the Ever-Living Granter 
of Life. If one of its results concern me, a thousand of its results pertain to my Creator. 
In that respect it did not require great length, in fact it needed no time at all;  

 

81

to  live  for  an  instant  was  sufficient.  This  truth  is  elucidated  together  with  proofs  in 
various parts of the Risale-i Nur, so here it will be explained in four ‘Matters,’ in brief 
and summary form. 

F i r s t   M a t t e r : I looked in the manner the essence and reality of life look to 
the  Ever-Living  and  Self-Subsistent  One,  and  I  saw  that  in  reality  my  life  was  a 
collection of keys with which to open the treasuries of the Divine Names, and a small 
map  of  their  inscriptions,  an  index  of  their  manifestations,  a  sensitive  balance  and 
measure of the vast truths of the universe, and a word of wisdom written to know and 
make  known,  and  to  understand  and  make understood, the meaningful Names of the 
Ever-Living  and  Self-Subsistent  One.  When  life’s  reality  is  this,  its  value  increases  a 
thousandfold  and  one  hour  of  it  gains  the  significance  of  a  lifetime.  In  respect  of  its 
relation  to  the  Pre-Eternal  One,  Who  has  no  time,  life  may  not  be  considered  with 
regard to its length or brevity. 

S e c o n d   M a t t e r : I considered the true rights of life, and I understood that 
my life is a dominical missive; it invites my brothers, other intelligent creatures, to read 
itself;  it  is  a  place  of  study  making  known  its  Creator.  It  is  also  a  manifesto 
proclaiming  my  Creator’s  perfections. Knowingly adorning itself in the  priceless gifts 
and  decorations  bestowed  on  it  by  life’s  Creator,  it  displays  them  consciously, 
gratefully,  and  believingly  to  the  Peerless  Monarch  in  the  daily  parade.  It 
comprehends,  observes,  and  proclaims  the  thankful  benedictions and glorifications of 
the  Creator  of  innumerable  living  beings.  And  it  makes  known  verbally  and  through 
the  tongues  of  disposition  and  worship,  the  beauties  of  the  Ever-Living  and  Self-
Subsistent One’s dominicality. I understood with ‘the knowledge of certainty’ that the 
elevated rights of life like these did not require lengthy time, and that they elevate life a 
thousandfold  and  are a hundred times more valuable than the worldly rights of life. I 
exclaimed:  Glory  be  to  God!  Belief  is  so  valuable  and  living  that  it  infuses  with  life 
everything  it  enters!  It  transforms  the  fleeting  glimmer  of  transitory  life  into  eternal 
life, dispelling the transience in it. 

T  h  i  r  d      M  a  t  t  e  r  :  I  considered  the  innate  duties  of  my  life  and  its  non-
material  benefits  which  look  to  my  Creator,  and  I  saw  that  it  acts  as  a mirror to the 
Creator of life in three ways: 

The First Way: Through its impotence, weakness, poverty, and need, my life acts 
as a mirror to the power, strength, wealth, and mercy of the Creator of life. Yes, just 
as  the  pleasure  of  food  is  known  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  hunger,  and  the 
degrees of light through the degrees of darkness, and the degrees of heat through the 
degrees of cold; in the same way, through the boundless impotence and poverty in my 
life, I under 

 

82

stood  the infinite power and mercy of my Creator, who answers my needs and wards 
off  my  innumerable  enemies.  I  understood  my  duties  of  entreaty,  supplication, 
worship, abasement, and seeking refuge with God, and I undertook these duties.  

The  Second  Way  is  acting  as  a  mirror  to  the  universal  and  comprehensive 
attributes  and  acts  of  my  Creator  through  such  meanings  in  my  own  life  as  partial 
knowledge,  will,  hearing  and  sight.  Yes,  I understood through the many  meanings in 
my  own  life  and  my  conscious  acts  like  knowing,  hearing,  seeing,  speaking,  and 
wanting  —like  my  size  relative  to  the  universe  but  in  far  greater  degree—  my 
Creator’s  all-encompassing  attributes  such  as  knowledge,  will,  hearing, sight, power, 
and life, and His qualities such as love, anger and compassion. Believing, I assented to 
them, and admitting this, I found another way leading to knowledge of God. 

The  Third  Way  is  acting  as  a  mirror  to  the  Divine  Names,  inscriptions  and 
manifestations of which are present in my life. Yes, as I beheld my own life and body, I 
saw  hundreds  of  sorts  of  miraculous  works,  inscriptions,  and  arts,  and  observed 
moreover  that  I  was  being  most  compassionately  nurtured.  I  understood  therefore 
through the light of belief, how extraordinarily generous, merciful, skilful and gracious 
was the One Who created me and gave me life; how wondrously powerful and, if one 
may say so, ingenious, provident, and efficient. I understood too what the innate duties 
and  aims  of  creation  and  results  of  life  consisted  of,  such  as  glorification, 
sanctification,  praise,  thanks,  exaltation,  affirming  God’s  unity,  and  declaring  His 
greatness  and  His  praises.  And  I  understood  with  ‘the  knowledge  of  certainty’  the 
reason  life  is  the  most  valuable  creature  in  the  universe  and  why  everything  is 
subjugated  to  it,  and  the  wisdom  in  everyone  having  an  innate  passion  for  life;  I 
understood that belief is the very life of life. 

F o u r t h   M a t t e r : In order to learn what the true pleasure and happiness of 
life consist of in this world, I again pondered over the verse For us God suffices, and 
He is the Best Disposer of Affairs! I saw that the purest pleasure and most untarnished 
happiness in this life of mine lay in belief. That is to say, my certain belief  that I was 
the  creature,  artefact,  and  totally  owned  slave  of  a  Compassionate  Sustainer  Who 
created me and gave me life, and was in His view and was being nurtured by him, that 
I was all the time in need of Him, and that He was both my Sustainer and my God and 
was  most  kind  and  compassionate  to  me,  was  such  a  perfect,  permanent,  painfree 
pleasure  and  happiness  that  it  is  indescribable.  I  understood  from  the  verse  just  how 
appropriate is the saying: All praise be to God for the bounty of belief! 

 

83

Thus,  these  four  matters,  that  is,  the  reality,  rights,  duties,  and  pleasure  of  life, 
show that the more life looks to the Eternally Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One and 
the  more  belief  becomes  the  life  and  spirit  of  life,  the  more  enduring  it becomes and 
the more enduring fruits it produces. Moreover, it becomes so elevated, it receives the 
manifestation  of  eternity;  it  no  longer  looks  to  the  length  and  brevity  of  life.  This  I 
learnt  from  the  verse.  And  in  the  name  of  all  lives  and  living  beings,  and  with  that 
intention  and  idea,  I  declared:  For  us  God  suffices,  and  He  is  the  Best  Disposer  of 
Affairs! 

The Sixth Degree of the Luminous Verse ‘For us God suffices’ 

At a time my old age was warning me of my own departure amid the events of the 
end  of  time,  which  in  turn  give  warning  of the end of the world and departure of all 
beings, my innate passionate love of beauty and fascination by perfection developed to 
an  extraordinary  degree,  and  I  observed  with  extreme  clarity  and  sorrow  that  death, 
transience, and non-existence were continuously causing the destruction of beings and 
their  separation,  and  were  pounding  this  beautiful  world  and  its  creatures,  breaking 
them  up  and spoiling their beauty. Seeking  consolation as that ‘metaphorical’ love in 
my nature rebelled violently against this situation, I again had recourse to the verse. It 
told me: “Recite me, and study my meaning carefully!” 

So  I  entered  the  observatory  of  the  Light  Verse  in  Sura  al-Nur  and  trained  the 
telescope  of  belief  on  the  farthermost  levels  of  the  verse  For  us  God  suffices,  and 
turned the microscope of the insight of belief at its most obscure mysteries. I saw that 
just  as  mirrors,  shining  objects,  fragments  of  glass,  and  even  bubbles,  reveal  the 
various sorts of concealed beauty in the sunlight; and with their different capacities and 
their change and renewal, renew its beauties; and by reflecting and refracting the light, 
make  known  the  hidden  beauties  of  the  sun  and  the  seven  colours  in  its  light;  so, 
without  cease,  in  order  to  act  as  mirrors  to  the  sacred  beauty  of  the  All-Beauteous 
One  of  Glory,  the  Sun  of  Pre-Eternity  and  Post-Eternity,  and  to  the  everlasting 
beauties  of  His  infinitely  lovely  Most  Beautiful  Names,  and  to  renew  their 
manifestation, these fine creatures, these lovely beings, these exquisite artefacts, come, 
then depart. As is explained in detail in the Risale-i Nur supported by powerful proofs, 
all  the  shades  of  beauty  that  are  to  be  observed  on  them  are  not  theirs,  but  are  the 
hints,  signs,  flashes,  and  manifestations of an eternal, sacred and transcendent beauty 
which  desires  to  be  perpetually  manifested  and  visible.  Here,  three  of  those  proofs 
shall be alluded to briefly. 

 

84

First  Proof:  The  beauty  of  a  finely  worked  object  points  to  the  beauty  of  the 
craftsmanship. The beauty of the craftsmanship points to the beauty of the name which 
was  the  source  of  the  craftsmanship.  The  beauty  of  the  name  of  the  craftsman’s  art 
points to the beauty of the craftsman’s attributes manifested in that art. The beauty of 
his  attributes  points  to  the  beauty  of  his  talent  and  abilities.  And  the  beauty  of  his 
abilities points self-evidently to the beauty of his essential self and his reality. 

In exactly the same way, the beauty in all the fine creatures which fill the universe, 
all  exquisitely  made,  testifies  decisively  to  the  beauty  of  the  acts  of  the  All-Glorious 
Craftsman.  And  the  beauty  of  the  acts  points  indubitably  to  the  beauty  of  the  titles, 
that is, Names, that look to those acts. And the beauty of the Names testifies certainly 
to the beauty of the sacred attributes that are the source of the Names. And the beauty 
of the attributes testifies to the beauty of the essential qualities and abilities that are the 
source of the attributes. And the beauty of the essential qualities and abilities testifies 
self-evidently to the beauty and sacred perfection of the Essence which is the source of 
the  acts  and  is  qualified  by  the  Names  and  attributes,  and  to  the  holy  beauty  of  His 
reality. 

That  is  to  say,  the  All-Beauteous  Maker  possesses  an  infinite  beauty  and 
loveliness  which  are  fitting  for  His  Most  Sacred  Essence,  one  shadow  of  which  has 
beautified all beings from top to bottom; He possesses a transcendent, sacred beauty a 
single  manifestation  of  which  has  endowed  with  beauty  the  whole  universe,  and  has 
adorned and illuminated with its flashes the entire sphere of contingency. 

Yes, just as a crafted work cannot have come into existence without an act, so an 
act cannot occur without the performer of the act. And just as it is impossible for there 
to be names without the one they signify, so attributes cannot be without the one they 
qualify.  Since  the  existence  of  a  work  of  art  self-evidently  points  to  the  act  which 
crafted it, and the existence of the act points to the existence of the worker of the act 
and  his  title,  and  to  the  existence  of  the  attribute  and  name  which  gave  rise  to  the 
work;  the  perfection  and  beauty  of  the  work  of  art  point  also  to  the  beauty  and 
perfection particular to the act which crafted it, and they point to the beauty particular 
to  and  fitting  for  the  name  of  the  performer  of  the  act,  and,  with  ‘knowledge  of 
certainty,’ to the beauty and perfection of his essence and reality, which are fitting and 
appropriate to them. 

In just the same way, since it is impossible for the constant activity under the veil 
of  the  works  of  art  in  the  universe  to  be  without  the  causer  of  the  activity,  and  the 
names whose manifestations and inscriptions are  

 

85

visible  on  creatures  to  be  without  the  one  they  signify,  and  the  attributes  like  power 
and will which are almost visible to be without the one they qualify; with their limitless 
existences, all the works of art, creatures and artefacts in the universe point decisively 
to the existence of their Creator, Maker, and Doer, and to the existence of His Names, 
and to the existence of His attributes, and to the existence of his essential qualities, and 
to the necessary existence of His Most Pure and Holy Essence. 

Similarly, all the different varieties of beauty, perfection, and loveliness to be seen 
in  creatures  testify  with  complete  clarity  —but  in  a  way  particular  to  and  fitting  for 
their  sacredness  and  necessity—  to  the  infinite,  unlimited,  multifarious  beauties  and 
perfections  of  the  acts,  names,  attributes,  qualities,  and  Essence  of  the  All-Glorious 
Maker;  they  point  most  decisively  to  their  beauties,  which  far  surpass  those  of  all 
beings. 

The Second Proof contains five Points: 
First Point: Relying on their illuminations and unveilings, the chiefs of the people 
of  reality  have  believed  and  stated  unanimously  —despite  their  paths  and  methods 
differing greatly from one another— that the instances of beauty  in all beings are the 
shadows,  flashes  and  manifestations  of  the  sacred,  hidden  beauty  of  the  Necessarily 
Existent One. 

Second  Point:  All  beautiful  creatures  appear  caravan  after  caravan,  and  not 
stopping, disappear; they come one after the other in succession, then depart. Yet an 
elevated  and  unchanging  beauty  displays  itself  in  the  mirrors  of  those  creatures, 
demonstrating certainly through the continuity of its manifestation that the beauty does 
not  belong  to  the  beautiful  creatures, to those mirrors. Rather, like the beauty of  the 
sun’s rays is to be seen on the bubbles floating on the surface  of running water, they 
are the lights of an eternal beauty. 

Third  Point:  It  is  clear  that  just  as  light  comes  from  something  luminous,  the 
giving  of  existence  from  something  existent,  bounty  from  riches,  munificence  from 
wealth,  and  instruction  from  knowledge,  so  the  giving  of  excellence  is  from  the 
excellent and the bestowal of beauty is from the beautiful; it could not be in any other 
way.  It  is  as  a  consequence  of  this  truth  that  we  believe  that  all  the  beauty  in  the 
universe  comes  from  the  beauty  of  the  beauteous  one  the  constantly  changing  and 
renewed  universe  describes  and  defines  through  all  its  creatures  and  the  tongues  of 
their mirror-like beings. 

Fourth  Point:  Just  as  the body relies on the spirit and subsists through it and is 
animated  by  it,  and  a  word  looks  to  the  meaning  and  is  illuminated  by  it,  and  form 
relies on reality and acquires value through it; so this corporeal and material manifest 
world is a body, a word, a form  

 

86

which  rests  on  the  Divine  Names  behind  the  veil  of  the  Unseen,  receiving  life  and 
vitality  from  them;  it  looks  to  them,  and  is  beautified.  All  the  instances  of  physical 
beauty proceed from the non-physical beauties of their own realities and meanings; and 
as for their realities, they receive effulgence from the Divine Names and are shadows 
of them of a sort. This truth is proved decisively in the Risale-i Nur. 

This means that all the varieties and sorts of beauty in the universe are the signs, 
marks, and manifestations —by means of names— of a faultless, transcendent Beauty 
which is manifested from beyond the veil of the Unseen. However, since the Necessary 
Existent’s  Most  Pure  and  Holy  Essence  resembles  absolutely  nothing  at  all  and  His 
attributes  are  infinitely  superior  to  the  attributes  of  contingent  beings,  His  sacred 
beauty also does not resemble the beauties of creatures and contingent beings, and is 
infinitely more exalted. Certainly, an everlasting beauty one manifestation of which is 
vast  Paradise  together  with  all  its  exquisiteness  and  beauty,  and one hour’s vision of 
which makes the inhabitants of Paradise oblivious to it cannot be finite, nor have any 
like, equal or peer. 

It is clear that the beauties of a thing are in accordance with itself; and there are 
thousands  of  sorts  of  beauties  which  all  differ  according  to  the  different  sorts  of 
beings.  For  example,  beauty  perceived  by  the  eye  is  not  the  same  as  something 
beautiful heard with the ears, and an abstract beauty comprehended by the mind is not 
the same as the beauty of food relished by the tongue; so too, the beauties appreciated 
and  perceived  as  beautiful  by  the  external  and  inner  senses  and  the  spirit  are  all 
different.  For  example,  the  beauty of belief, the beauty of reality, the beauty of light, 
the  beauty  of  a  flower,  the  beauty  of  spirit,  and  the  beauties  of  form,  compassion, 
justice,  kindness,  and  wisdom.  Similarly,  since  the  utter  and  infinite  beauties  of  the 
Most Beautiful Names of the All-Beauteous One of Glory are all different, the beauties 
in beings also differ. 

If  you  want  to  observe  one  manifestation  of  the  beauties  of  the  All-Beauteous 
One’s  Names  in  the  mirrors  of  beings,  take  a  sweeping  look  with  the  eye  of  the 
imagination at the face of the earth supposing it to be a small garden; you will see that 
terms  like  mercifulness,  compassionateness,  wisdom,  and  justice  allude  to  both  the 
names, and acts, and attributes, and qualities of Almighty God. 

Observe the sustenance of foremost man and of all living creatures, which arrives 
regularly  from  behind  the  veil  of  the  Unseen,  and  see  the  beauty  of  Divine 
mercifulness. 

Then consider the miraculous sustenance of all young, and the two pumps of milk 

hanging over their heads on the breasts of their mothers,  

 

87

as  sweet and pure as the water of Kawthar, and see the captivating beauty of Divine 
compassion. 

Then  observe  the  peerless  beauty  of  Divine  wisdom,  which  makes  the  whole 
universe  into  a  mighty  book  of  wisdom  every  letter  of  which  contains  a  hundred 
words,  and  every  word  of  which  contains  a  hundred  lines,  and  every  line  of  which 
contains  a  thousand  chapters, and every chapter  of which contains hundreds of small 
books. 

Then see the imperious beauty of a justice which holds the whole universe and all 
its beings in equilibrium; and maintains the balance of all the heavenly bodies, lofty and 
lowly; and supplies symmetry and proportion, the most important elements of beauty; 
and causes everything to acquire the optimum state; and gives the right to life to living 
beings, and ensures that their rights are preserved; and halts and punishes aggressors. 

Then consider the inscription of man’s life story in his memory, as tiny as a grain 
of wheat, and the programmes of the second lives of all plants and trees in their seeds; 
and the members and faculties necessary for the defence of living beings, for instance 
bees’ wings and their poisonous stings, and the small bayonets of thorned plants, and 
the  hard  shells  of  seeds;  and  see  the  subtle  beauty  of  dominical  preservation  and 
protection. 

Then  consider  the  guests  at  the  table  of  the  earth  of  the  Most  Merciful  and 
Compassionate  One,  Who  is  absolutely  Munificent,  and  the  pleasant  smells  of  the 
numberless different foods prepared by mercy, and their beautiful and various colours, 
and  their  delicious  and  differing  tastes,  and  the  organs  and  members  of  all  living 
creatures which assist their pleasure and enjoyment; and see the exceedingly pleasant, 
sweet beauty of dominical bestowal and munificence. 

Then  consider the  meaningful  forms  of  foremost  man  and  of all living creatures, 
which are opened up from droplets of fluid through the manifestation of the Names of 
Opener and Giver of Form, and the attractive faces of the flowers of spring opened up 
from  seeds  and  tiny  nuclei;  and  see  the  miraculous  beauty  of  Divine  ‘opening’  and 
giving of form. 

Thus,  by  analogy  with  these  examples,  each  of  the  Divine  Names  has  a  sacred 
beauty  particular  to it a single manifestation of which makes beautiful  the vast world 
and innumerable species of beings. You may see the manifestation of a Name’s beauty 
in  a  single  flower;  the spring is also  a flower; Paradise is a flower yet unseen. If you 
can  visualize  the  whole  of  spring  and  see  Paradise  with  the  eye  of  belief,  you  may 
understand the utter majesty of everlasting Beauty. If you respond to that Beauty with 
the beauty of belief and worship, you will be a most beautiful creature.  

 

88

While if you meet it with the boundless ugliness of misguidance and loathsomeness of 
rebellion,  you  will  be  both  a  most  ugly  creature  and  will  in  effect  be  loathed  by  all 
beautiful creatures. 

Fifth  Point:  In  accordance  with  the  law  that  all  fine  arts  and  crafts  and 
accomplishments  want  to  display  themselves  and  have  themselves  appreciated,  a 
master of hundreds of arts and crafts who possessed endless perfections and beauties 
made  a  wondrous  palace  in  order  to  describe  and  reveal  all  his  arts,  crafts  and 
accomplishments, and his hidden beauties. Anyone seeing the miraculous palace would 
immediately  think  of  the  virtues,  arts  and  perfections  of  its  master  and  maker. 
Believing in them and affirming them as though seeing them, he would declare: “One 
who  was  not  beautiful  and  skilled  in  every  way  could not be the source, creator and 
originator  of  a  work  so  beautiful.  It  is  as  though  his  immaterial  beauties  and 
perfections are embodied in this palace.” 

In exactly the same way, so long as his mind and heart are not corrupted, one who 
sees  the  exhibition  of  wonders  and  beauties  of  the  magnificent  palace  of  this  world, 
that  is, the universe, will  realize that the palace is a mirror, decorated the way it is in 
order  to  show  the  beauties  and  perfections  of  another.  Yes,  since  there  is  nothing 
similar to the palace of the world from which its beauties could have been imitated and 
copied,  certainly,  its  Maker  possesses  the  necessary  beauties  in  himself  and  in  his 
Names. It is from these that the universe is derived and according to them that it was 
made. It was written like a book in order to express His beauties and Names. 

The Third Proof consists of three Points: 
First  Point:  This  is  a truth explained in detail with powerful proofs in the Third 
Stopping-Place of the Thirty-Second Word. Referring detailed discussion of it to that 
Word, here we shall consider it only with a brief allusion. 

We look at creatures, and especially animals and plants, and we see that governing 
them  are  a  constant  adorning,  which  points  to  intention  and  will  and  makes  known 
knowledge and wisdom, and an ordering and beautifying it is impossible to attribute to 
chance.  There  is  in  everthing  an  art  so  delicate,  a  wisdom  so  fine,  an  adornment  so 
elevated,  an  organization  so  compassionate,  and  situation  so  sweet  that  it  is  clearly 
understood that behind the veil of the Unseen is a craftsman who wants to make his art 
appreciated,  attract  the  gazes of the attentive, and please his artefacts  and  observers; 
who  wants  to  make  himself  known  and  acquainted  and  loved  through  displaying 
numerous  skills  and  perfections  in  each  work  of  his  art, and to make himself praised 
and applauded. He bestows on  

 

89

conscious  creatures  in  order  to  please  them  and  make  them  happy  and  friends  of 
himself, every sort of delicious bounty from unexpected places in a way it is impossible 
to attribute to chance.  

Also to be observed are a generous treatment, a mutual acquaintance and friendly 
dialogue with the tongue of disposition, and a compassionate response to supplication 
which make perceived a profound compassion and elevated mercy. That is to say, the 
bestowal  of  bounty  and  giving  of  pleasure  which  are  observed  behind  the  making 
known  and  loved,  which  are  as  clear  as  the  sun,  arise  from  a  genuine  wish  to  be 
compassionate  and  powerful  desire  to  be  merciful.  And  this  powerful  desire  in  One 
Absolutely  Self-Sufficient  Who  has  no  need  of  anything  demonstrates  certainly  an 
utterly perfect pre-eternal, everlasting, peerless Beauty the nature and reality of which 
necessitate its wanting to be manifested and to see itself in mirrors. In order to display 
and see itself in various mirrors, this Beauty has taken on the form of compassion and 
mercy; then in the mirrors of conscious beings has assumed the state of bestowal and 
munificence;  then  has  taken  the  form  of  making  itself  known  and  loved;  and  then 
bestowed the light of adorning creatures and making them beautiful. 

Second  Point:  Mankind’s  genuine,  intense,  and  powerful  love  of  God,  and 
especially  that  of  its  elevated  classes  and  of innumerable persons whose paths are all 
different, points self-evidently to a peerless beauty; indeed it testifies to it. Yes, such a 
love  looks  only  to  such  a  beauty  and  necessitates  it;  such  passion  demands  such 
loveliness. Indeed, all the praise offered by beings verbally and through the tongue of 
disposition  looks  to  that pre-eternal Beauty and goes to it. In the view of lovers like 
Shams-i  Tabrizi,  all  the  attraction,  captivation,  ecstasy,  and  drawing  truths  in  the 
universe  are  signs  of  a  pre-eternal  and  post-eternal  truth  of  attraction.  While  the 
ecstatic motion and rotations which cause the heavenly bodies and all beings to dance 
and spin like moths and Mevlevi dervishes are the passionate and dutiful responses to 
the imperious displays of the sacred beauty of that captivating truth. 

Third  Point:  All  the  scholars  who  have  researched  into  reality  have  agreed  that 
existence  is  pure  good  and  light,  while  non-existence  is  pure  evil  and  darkness.  The 
chiefs of the people of reason and the people of the heart have agreed that in the final 
analysis  all  instances  of  good,  beauty,  and  pleasure  arise from  existence,  and  that  all 
evils and bad, calamities, suffering, and even sins are attributable to non-existence. 

I f   y o u   s a y : The source of all beauties is existence, yet also in existence are 

disbelief and the egotism of the soul? 

T h e   A n s w e r : Disbelief is non-existence because it is denial of  

 

90

the  truths  of  belief.  The  existence  of  egotism,  however,  is  a  form  of  non-existence 
which  has  acquired  the  colour  and  form  of  existence  due  to  a  wrongful  claim  to 
ownership,  not  knowing  the  nature  of  man’s  mirror-like  being  and  assuming  the 
imaginary to be actual. Since  the source of all beauties is existence and the source of 
all  evils  is  non-existence,  a  Necessary  Existence  and  Pre-Eternal,  Everlasting  Being, 
which is the firmest and most elevated and shining existence and the one most distant 
from non-existence, will demand the beauty which is the most powerful, and the most 
elevated  and  shining  and  free  of  any  blemish;  it  will  rather  express  such  a  beauty; 
indeed, it will be such a beauty. Like all-encompassing light is necessitated by the sun, 
so the Necessary Existent necessitates an eternal beauty; he gives light through it. 

All praise be to God for the bounty of belief   

Our Sustainer! Do not call us to task if we forget or do wrong.4 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.5 

NOTE: Nine degrees of the luminous verse “For us God suffices” were going 
to  be  written,  but  due  to  certain  circumstances,  three  degrees  have  been 
postponed. 

REMINDER:  Since  the  Risale-i  Nur  belongs  to  the  Qur’an  and  is  a 
commentary  based  on  proofs  proceeding  from  it,  it  contains  necessary, 
purposeful, indeed, essential and beneficial repetitions, the same as the Qur’an 
contains  subtle,  wise,  and  necessary  repetitions  which  cause  no  boredom. 
Also,  since  the  Risale-i  Nur  consists  of  proofs  of  the  profession  of  Divine 
unity, which does not cause tedium but is repeated with pleasure and zeal, its 
essential  repetitions  are  not  a  fault,  and  do  not  and  should  not  cause 
boredom. 

                                             

4 Qur’an, 2:286. 
5 Qur’an, 2:32. 

 

91

The Fifth Chapter 
(of the Twenty-Ninth Flash)1 

On  the  degrees  of  For  us  God  suffices,  and  He  is  the  Best  Disposer  of 
Affairs! It consists of five ‘Points’. 

FIRST POINT 

This  phrase  is  a  well-tried  remedy  for  the  sickness  of  human  impotence  and 

poverty: For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs! 

The  Giver  of  Existence  is  Eternally  Existent,  there  is  no  harm  therefore  in  the 
passing  of  beings,  for  the  things  that  are  loved  continue  to  exist  through  the 
continuance of the One Who gave them existence, the Necessary Existent. 

He is the Enduring Maker and Creator; the passing of creatures causes no sorrow, 

then, for the means of love for them, their Maker, is Enduring. 

He  is  the  Eternal  King  and  Lord,  so  there  are  no  regrets  on  the  passing  of  His 

dominions, on their departing and being renewed. 

He  is  the  Eternal  All-Knowing  Witness;  no  grief  is  felt  therefore  at  the 
disappearance  from  this  world  of  things  that  are  loved,  for  they  have  perpetual 
existence in the knowledge of that Pre-Eternal Witness, and in His view. 

He is the Enduring Owner and Creator; there is no pain therefore at the passing of 

beautiful things, for the source of their beauty, their Creator’s Names, are enduring. 

He is the Enduring Inheritor and Raiser to Life; there should be no lamenting on 
being parted from beloveds, for the One Who will resurrect them and return them to 
Himself is Enduring. 

He is Eternally All-Beauteous and Glorious; there should be no distress therefore 
at  the  disappearance  of  beautiful  things,  for  those  beautiful  things  are  the  mirrors  of 
the Beautiful Names, which endure together with their beauties after the disappearance 
of the mirrors. 

He is the Eternal True Object of Love and Worship; so no sorrow should be felt 

on the passing of ‘metaphorical’ beloveds, for the True Beloved is Eternal. 

He is Eternally Merciful, Compassionate, Loving, and Clement; so the passing of 

the apparent bestowers of bounties and compassion has no  

                                             

1 The original of the Twenty-Ninth Flash is in Arabic. [Tr.] 

 

92

importance,  it  should  not  cause  sorrow  or  despair,  for  the  One  Whose  mercy  and 
compassion encompass all things is Enduring. 

He is Eternally Beauteous, Gracious, and Kind; the disappearance of gracious and 
sympathetic  beings,  therefore,  should  neither  cause  pain,  nor  should  importance  be 
given  it,  for  the  One  Who  takes  the  place  of  all  of  them  and  a  single  of  Whose 
manifestations they all together cannot replace, is Enduring. 

Since He is Enduring and possesses these attributes, He takes the place of every 
sort of transient, ephemeral beloved in this world. For us God suffices, and He is the 
Best Disposer of Affairs! 

Yes,  enough  for  the  immortality  of  this  world  and  all  it  contains  is  the  enduring 

existence of its Owner, Maker, and Creator. 

SECOND POINT 

Sufficient  for  my  immortality  is  God,  for  He  is  my  Eternal  God  and  my  Eternal 
Creator, the Eternal Giver of my existence, my Eternal Maker, my Eternal Owner, my 
Eternal  Witness,  the  Eternal  True  Object  of  my  Worship,  my  Eternal  Resurrector. 
There  is  therefore  no  harm  in  the  disappearance  of  my  being;  there  should  be  no 
sorrow,  regret,  or  grief.  For  the Giver of my existence is Enduring, and His creation 
through His Names is also Enduring. The attributes of my person are nothing but the 
rays  of  one  of  His  Names.  They  exist  permanently  in  their  Creator’s  knowledge  and 
within  His  view,  and  do  not  therefore  cease  to  exist  on  their  passing  and 
disappearance. 

Likewise, sufficient for me in respect of immortality and the pleasure of it, are my 
knowledge,  understanding,  consciousness,  and  belief  that  the  rays  in  my  being  of  an 
Enduring  Name  of  my  God  are Enduring, and that the reality of my being is  nothing 
other  than  a  shadow  of  that  Name,  and  that  through  the  mystery  of  its  reflection  or 
image in the mirror of my being, my reality is not itself lovable, but lovable on account 
of the immortality of the various enduring things reflected in it. 

THIRD POINT 

For  us  God  suffices,  and  He  is  the  Best  Disposer  of  Affairs!  For  He  is  the 
Necessary Existent, and these transitory beings are nothing other than places reflecting 
the  renewal  of  the  manifestations  of  His  existence  and  giving  of  existence.  Through 
Him and through being connected to Him and through knowledge of Him, are endless 
lights of existence; while without Him, there are the endless darkness of non-existence 
and the limitless pains of separation. 

These transitory beings are mere mirrors, and with the changing of  

 

93

Similitudes. 

hereafter. 

vistas. 

their  relative  determinations,  they  are  renewed  in  six  aspects  in  their  transience, 
disappearance, and permanence: 

The  First:  The  permanent  existence  of  their  beautiful  meanings  and  identities  in 

the World of Similitudes. 

The Second: The permanent existence of their forms in the tablets of the World of 

The  Third:  The permanent existence of their  results and fruits which look to  the 

The  Fourth:  The  permanent  existence  of 

their  dominical  glorifications, 

represented [in the Preserved Tablet], which is a sort of existence. 

The  Fifth:  The  permanent  existence  in  the  exhibitions  of  knowledge  and  eternal 

The  Sixth:  The  permanent  existence  of  their  spirits,  if  they  have  them.  For  their 
various functions and states in their death, transience, disappearance, annihilation, and 
their appearance and extinction, is nothing other than what is demanded by the Divine 
Names.  It is  due  to  the  mystery of this that beings flow like a rushing torrent on the 
waves  of  life  and  death,  existence  and  non-existence.  And  from  this  function  arises 
perpetual  activity  and  continuous  creation.  I,  and  everyone,  therefore,  are  compelled 
to say: For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs! That is, as regards 
existence,  it  is  sufficient  for  me  that  I  am  the  work  of  the  Necessary  Existent;  to 
receive this illumined existence for a passing instant is preferable to millions of years of 
apparent, fruitless existence. 

Yes, through the mystery of being related to God through belief, a minute of this 
existence  is  the  equivalent  of  thousands  of  years  without  the  relation  of  belief;  the 
degrees of existence of that minute, even, are more complete and extensive than those 
thousands of years. 

Likewise, sufficient for me for existence and the value of existence is my being the 
art of the One Whose grandeur is in the heavens and signs are on the earth, and Who 
created the heavens and earth in six days. 

Likewise, sufficient for me for existence and its perfection is my being the artefact 
of  the  One  Who  adorned  and  lit  up  the  heavens  with  lamps,  and  made  dazzling  the 
earth with flowers. 

Likewise,  sufficient  for  me  for  pride  and  honour  is  my  being  the  creature  and 
totally-owned slave and servant of the One in relation to Whose perfection and beauty 
all the beauties and perfections of the universe are merely dim shadows, and signs of 
His perfection and indications of His beauty. 

 

94

Likewise, sufficient for me for everything is He Who stores up in tiny containers 
between the kaf and the nun2 incalculable numbers of bounties, and preserves through 
His power tons in a single handful of the subtle containers called seeds and grains. 

Likewise, sufficient for me in place of all possessors of beauty and beneficence is 
the All-Beauteous and Compassionate One. For all these beautiful creatures are merely 
ephemeral  mirrors  for  the  renewal  of  the  lights  of  His  beauty  in  the  course  of  the 
seasons,  the  centuries,  and  the  ages.  And  all  these  recurring  bounties  and  successive 
fruits  of  the  spring  and  summer  are  places  of  manifestation  for  the  renewal  of  His 
continuous bestowal in the passage of creatures, days, and years. 

Likewise,  sufficient  for  me  for  life  and  its  true  nature  is  my  being  a  map,  index, 
summary, balance, and measure of the manifestations of  the Names of the Creator of 
life and death. 

Likewise, sufficient for me for life and its functions is my being a word inscribed 
with  the  pen  of  power,  pointing  to  and  making  understood  the  Names  of  the 
Absolutely Powerful One, the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent; by my life receiving the 
manifestations  of  my  Creator’s  essential  attributes,  and  His  are  the  Most  Beautiful 
Names. 

Likewise,  sufficient  for  me  for  life  and  its  rights  is  my  displaying  it  among  my 
brother creatures and proclaiming it to them, and exhibiting in the view of the Creator 
of  the  universe  my  being  decked  out  in  the  manifestations  of  My  Creator’s  Names, 
Who  has  adorned  me  with  the  bejewelled  dress  of  my being, the gown of my inborn 
nature, and the necklace of my well-ordered life, which is ornamented with the gifts of 
His mercy. 

Likewise,  sufficient  for  me  for  the  rights  of  my  life  are  my  understanding  the 
salutations of living creatures to the Granter of Life and my observation of them, and 
my testifying to them. 

Likewise, sufficient for me for the rights of my life is my being adorned and made 
beautiful  with  the  embossed  jewels  of  His  bounties,  to  present  them  consciously, 
because of my belief to the view of the Pre-Eternal Monarch. 

Likewise, sufficient for me for life and its pleasures is my knowledge, realization, 
awareness, and belief that I am His slave, artefact, and creature, needy and wanting for 
Him;  and  He  is  my  Creator,  Compassionate  to  me,  Who  nurtures  and  raises  me 
munificently, graciously, through His bestowal, as befits His wisdom and mercy. 
Likewise, sufficient for me for life and its value is my being a measure  

                                             

2 That is, the creative command “Be! (Kun!).” See, Qur’an, 36:82, etc. [Tr.] 

 

95

through my absolute impotence, poverty, and weakness to the degrees of the power of 
the Absolutely Powerful One, the degrees of mercy of the Absolutely Compassionate 
One, and the levels of strength of the Possessor of Absolute Strength. 

Likewise,  sufficient  for  me  for  perfection  is  my  knowledge  that  my  God  is 
Absolutely  Perfect,  and  whatever  things  there  are  in  the  universe  which  are  perfect, 
they are signs of His perfection and indications of it. 

Likewise,  sufficient  for  me  for  perfection  in  myself  is  belief  in  God,  because  for 

man, belief is the source of all perfections. 

Likewise,  sufficient  for  me  for  all  my  needs  sought  through  the  tongues  of  my 
various faculties, is my God, Sustainer, and Creator, the Giver of my form; His are the 
Most  Beautiful  Names;  He  feeds  me  and  gives  me  to  drink;  He  nurtures,  raises, 
administers,  and  perfects  me;  He  is  limitless  in  glory,  and  His  favours  are 
comprehensive. 

FOURTH POINT 

Sufficient for me for all my wishes is He Who opened up from a fluid through His 
subtle art, subtle power, wisdom, and His subtle dominicality, my form and that of all 
my fellow living creatures. 

Likewise, sufficient for me for all my aims is He Who made me, opened my ears 
and eyes, included in my body my tongue and my heart, and placed in them and in my 
other faculties innumerable precise scales to weigh up the contents of the treasuries of 
His  mercy.  Similarly,  He  placed  in  my  tongue,  heart,  and  nature,  countless  sensitive 
instruments to gauge the varieties of the treasures of His Names. 

Likewise,  sufficient  for  me  is  He  Who,  through  His  glorious  Godhead,  beautiful 
mercy,  grand  dominicality,  munificent  clemency,  vast  power,  and  subtle  wisdom, 
included  in  my  insignificant,  lowly  person  and  weak  and  wanting  being,  all  these 
members  and  faculties,  limbs  and  systems,  senses  and  feelings,  inner  faculties  and 
spiritual powers, to allow me to know all the varieties of His bounties and comprehend 
most of the manifestations of His Names. 

FIFTH POINT 

I and all men should declare thankfully and proudly:  
Sufficient for me is the One Who created me and took me out of the darkness of 

non-existence, bestowing on me light of being. 

Likewise,  sufficient  for  me  is  the  One  Who  bestowed  on  me  the  bounty  of  life, 

which gives all things to those who possess it and stretches out its hands to all things. 

 

96

Likewise, sufficient for me is the One Who made me a human being and bestowed 
on  me the bounty of humanity, which  makes man the microcosm, greater in meaning 
than the macrocosm. 

 Likewise, sufficient for me is the One Who made me a believer and bestowed on 
me  the  bounty  of  belief,  which  makes  this  world  and  the  hereafter  two  tables  laden 
with bounties, and offers them to the believer with the hand of belief. 

Likewise, sufficient for me is the One Who made me a member of the community 
of His Beloved, Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) and bestowed on me 
love  of  God  and  being  loved  by  Him,  which  are  found  in  belief  and  are  the  highest 
degrees of human perfection; and through this love springing from belief, expanded the 
extent  to  which  believers  could  benefit,  to  the  infinite  contents  of  the  spheres  of 
contingency and necessity. 

Likewise,  sufficient  for  me  is  the  One  Who,  not  making  me  inanimate,  or  an 
animal,  or  leaving  me  in  misguidance,  gave  me  preference  with  regard  to  nature, 
species,  religion,  and  belief,  over  the  majority  of  creatures;  praise  and  thanks  are 
therefore due to Him alone. 

Likewise, sufficient for me is the One Who made me a comprehensive place of the 
manifestations of His Names, and in accordance with the meaning of the Hadith: “The 
heavens and the  earth contained me not; I was contained in the heart of my believing 
servant,”3  bestowed  on  me  a  bounty  which  the  universe  could  not  contain;  that  is, 
man’s  essential  nature  is  a  comprehensive  place  of  manifestation  of  all  the  Divine 
Names manifested in the universe. 

Likewise, sufficient for me is He Who bought from me the property of His I had 
in  order  to  preserve  it  and  later  return  it  to  me,  and  give  me  Paradise  as  the  price. 
Praise and thanks be to Him to the number of particles of my being multiplied by the 
number of atoms in existence. 

Sufficient for me is my Sustainer; May God be exalted! 
And the Light of Muhammad; God’s blessings be upon him! 
There is no god but God! 

Sufficient for me is my Sustainer; May God be exalted! 
My heart’s inner life is the remembrance of God; 
The remembrance of Ahmad; God’s blessings be upon him! 
There is no god but God! 

                                             

3 See, al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 195. 

 

97

The Fifth Ray 

 [Thirteen  years  ago,1  as  an  addendum  to  the  discussion  in  Muhakemat-i 
Bedi‘iye, which was published thirty years ago, the draft of twenty ‘Matters’ 
was  written  about  the  Barrier  of  Dhu’l-Qarnayn,  Gog  and  Magog,  and  the 
signs of the end of time. This has now been corrected for the sake of a dear 
friend, and been made the Fifth Ray.] 

(The Fifth Ray of The Thirty-First Flash of The Thirty-First Letter) 

NOTE:  So  that  the  purpose  of  the  Introduction  may  be  understood,  the 
‘Matters’ following the Introduction should be read first. 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 

A point about the verse, 

But already have come some tokens thereof2 

was written in order to protect the belief of the mass of believers and preserve it from 
doubt. Like allegorical verses of the Qur’an, some Hadiths about the events of the end 
of  time  have  profound  meanings.  They  cannot  be  expounded  in  the  same  way  as 
incontestable  verses,  and  not  everyone  can  understand  them.  Rather  than  being 
expounded, they are interpreted. According to the verse, 

But  none  save  God  knows  its  final  meaning  (ta’wil).  And  those  who  are 
deeply rooted in knowledge,3 

                                             

1 It is now more than forty years ago. [This corrected version, which Bediuzzaman designated 
The Fifth Ray, was compiled in Kastamonu, most probably in 1938. Muhâkemat was published in 
Istanbul in 1911. —Tr.] 
2 Qur’an, 47:18. 
3 Qur’an, 3:7. 

 

98

their meaning, interpretation and what is intended by them is understood only after the 
event, so that those firmly grounded in knowledge say: 

“We believe in it; the whole [of the divine writ] is from our Sustainer,4 

and they disclose those hidden truths. 

Introduction consists of five ‘Points.’  

This  Fifth  Ray  contains  an  Introduction  and  twenty-three  ‘Matters.’  The 

First Point: Since belief and accountability are a test, a trial, a competition within 
the  bounds  of  man’s  will,  matters  that  are  obscure,  profound,  and  in  need  of  careful 
study  and  experiment  cannot  be  obvious.  They  should  not  be  so  compelling  that 
everyone has to affirm them willy-nilly. For in this way the Abu Bakr’s may rise to the 
highest of the high and the Abu Jahl’s descend to the lowest of the low. If there were 
no  will,  there  would  be  no  accountability.  It  is  because  of  this  mystery  and  wisdom 
that  miracles  are  displayed  only  rarely,  and  in  this  realm  of  accountability,  like  some 
allegorical verses of the Qur’an, the signs of the end of the world, which will be visible 
and seen, are obscure and open to interpretation. Since when the sun rises in the west 
it will be so clear everyone will be compelled to affirm it, the door of repentance will 
be  closed  and  repentance  and  belief  will  no  longer  be  accepted.  For  the  Abu  Bakr’s 
and the Abu Jahl’s will be equal in their affirmation of it. In fact, although when Jesus 
(Peace be upon him) comes he himself will know he is Jesus, not everyone will know. 
Similarly,  fearsome  figures  such  as  the  Dajjal  and  Sufyan  (Antichrist)5 will not know 
themselves to be such. 

Second  Point:  Some  of  the  matters  of  the  Unseen,  outside  the  realm  of  man’s 
perception,  that  were  made  known  to  the  Prophet  (PBUH)  were  made  known  in 
detail. These he could in no way alter or interfere with, like the incontestable verses of 
the Qur’an and Sacred Hadiths.6 Others, employing his eloquence, he would illustrate 
and  explain  in  detail  or  in  allegorical  form  suitably  to  the  wisdom  of  man’s 
accountability.  For  example,  one  time  when  conversing  with  some  people,  a  deep 
rumbling was heard. He said: “That is the sound of a rock which has been rolling down 
hill for seventy years and has at this moment come to rest in the very pit of Hell.”7 Five 
minutes after he made this strange announcement, someone came and said: “Such-and-
such a dissembler has died. He was  

                                             

4 Qur’an, 3:7. 
5 There are numerous Hadiths about the Muslim Antichrist, known as ‘the Sufyan’ (al-Sufyani). 

See, for example, al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 520. [Tr.] 

6 Hadith Qudsi: A saying of the Prophet (PBUH) imparted to him by revelation or inspiration, 

the wording of which was his own. [Tr.] 

7 Muslim, Janna, 31, No: 2844; Musnad, iii, 341. 

 

99

seventy  years  old,  and  has  gone  to  Hell,”  showing  the  meaning  of  the  Prophet’s 
eloquent words. 

NOTE:  Minor  future  events  not  included  among  the  truths  of  belief  were 

considered unimportant by the Prophet (PBUH). 

The Third Point  consists of two ‘Points’: 
The  First:  Because  in  the  course  of  time  ordinary  people  attached  literal 
meanings  to  some  Hadiths  which  had  been  narrated  in  the  form  of  comparisons  and 
allegories, such Hadiths are apparently not conformable with reality. Although they are 
pure truth, they appear not to be so. For example, two angels called Thawr and Hut,8 
who are among the bearers of the earth and as though the bearers of the Throne, were 
conceived of as a huge ox and a gigantic fish. 

The  Second:  Some  Hadiths  refer  to  the  majority  of  Muslims,  or  to  the  Islamic 
State,  or  to  the  centre  of  the  Caliphate,  but  they  were  understood  to  refer  to  all the 
people in the world. Although being particular in some respect, they were supposed to 
be universal and general. For instance, it says in a narration: “A time will come when 
no  one  remains  who  says:  Allah!  Allah!”9  That  is,  “The  places  where  God’s  name  is 
mentioned will be closed, and the call to prayer and iqama will be recited in Turkish.” 

Fourth  Point:    Just  as  for  numerous  reasons  and  instances  of  wisdom  hidden 
matters of ‘the Unseen’ like death and the appointed hour remain secret, so the end of 
the world, which is its death and the appointed hour of mankind and that of the animal 
kingdom, has been left secret for many good reasons. 

Yes, if the appointed hour of death were specified, the first half of life would be 
passed in absolute heedlessness, and the second half in absolute terror, as every day a 
further step was taken towards the gallows. This would destroy the wise and beneficial 
balance  of  hope  and  fear.  Similarly,  if  the  end  of  the  world,  its  death  and  appointed 
hour,  had  been  specified,  the  Early  and  Middle  Ages  would  have  been  virtually 
unaffected by the idea of the hereafter, and the later ages would have been passed in 
terror. No pleasure or value would have remained in worldly life, nor, as an act of will, 
would  the  worship  of  God,  between  hope  and  fear,  have  held  any  importance  or 
purpose. Also, if the death of the world had been specified, some of the truths of belief 
would  have  been  clearly  obvious  and  everyone would have affirmed them willy-nilly. 
The mystery of man’s  

                                             

Manthur, i, 329. 

8 See, Bayhaqi, Shu’ab al-Iman, 403; Zahabi, Mizan al-I’tidal, iv, 352; Suyuti, al-Durr al-

9 Tirmidhi, Fitan, 35; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 494; Ibn Hibban, al-Sahih, viii, 299. 

 

100

accountability  and  the  wisdom  and  purpose  of  belief,  which  are  tied to man’s choice 
and will, would have been negated. 

It is for numerous benefits such as these that matters related to the Unseen remain 
secret. Everyone therefore continually bears  in  mind both his death and his continued 
life, and he works both for this world and the hereafter. He is also aware that the end 
of the world may occur in any age, or that it may continue, and so works for eternal 
life within the transitoriness of this world, and strives to build the world as though he 
was never going to die.10 

Also,  if  the  occurrence  of  calamities  had  been  specified,  the  man  who  expected 
one would suffer a calamity perhaps ten times greater than the actual calamity. Divine 
wisdom and mercy have therefore veiled the time of their occurrence and left it secret, 
so  that  the  man  does  not  suffer  the  misfortune.  It  is  because  most  hidden  cosmic 
events  are  tied  to  such  instances  of  wisdom  that  to  give  news  of  the  Unseen  or  to 
foretell events has been prohibited. In order not to be disrespectful and disobedient in 
the face of the principle None knows the Unseen save God, those who with dominical 
leave  even,  give  news  of  the  Unseen  other  than  concerning man’s accountability and 
the truths of belief, have done so only allusively and indirectly. In fact, the good tidings 
about the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) in the Torah, Gospels, and Psalms, are veiled 
and  obscure,  in  consequence  of  which  some  of  the  adherents  of  those  scriptures  put 
various  meanings  on  those  passages  and  did  not  believe  them.  However,  since  the 
wisdom  in  man’s  accountability  necessitates  that  the  questions  included  among  the 
tenets of belief are communicated explicitly and repeatedly, the Qur’an of Miraculous 
Exposition  and  its  Glorious  Interpreter  (Peace  and  blessings  be upon him) tell of  the 
matters  of  the  hereafter  in  detail,  and  of  future  worldly  events  only  in  summary 
fashion. 

Fifth Point:   Also, since the wonders of both the Antichrists (Dajjal), which are 
related to their centuries, have been narrated in connection with them, those wonders 
have  been  imagined  to  proceed  from  their  persons  and  this  has  led  to  the  narrations 
becoming  allegorical  and  their  true  meanings  being  concealed.  Like, for example, his 
travelling by aeroplane and railway train. 

And, for example, it is well-known that when the Islamic Antichrist dies, the satan 
who  serves  him  will  shout  out  the  news  to  the  whole  world11  from  ‘Dikili  Tas,’  the 
obelisk in Istanbul, and everyone will hear  

10 Suyuti, al-Fath al-Kabir, i, 190, 202; al-Manawi, Fayd al-Qadir, i, 532, No: 1068; ii, 12, No: 

                                             

1201. 

11 Muslim, Fitan, 34. 

 

101

its  voice  saying  that  he  is  dead.  That  is  to  say,  the  news  will  be  broadcast  by  radio, 
which is wonderful and leaves even satans in amazement. 

Also,  since  the  strange  circumstances  and  fearsome  activities  of  the  Antichrist’s 
regime,  and  the  covert  organization  and  government  that  he  founds,  have  been 
narrated  as  referring  to  his  person,  their  true  meaning  has  remained  obscure.  For 
example, “He will be so powerful and long-lived that only Jesus (PUH) will be able to 
kill  him;  nothing  else  will  be  able  to.”12  That  is,  it  will  only  be  a  revealed,  elevated, 
pure religion that will be able to overturn his way and rapacious regime, and eliminate 
them. Such a religion will emerge among the true followers of Jesus (PUH), and it will 
follow  the  Qur’an  and  become  united  with  it.  On  the  coming  of  Jesus  (PUH)  and 
emergence of the true Christian religion, the Antichrist’s irreligious way will be wiped 
out and will cease. The Antichrist’s person could otherwise be killed by a mere germ 
or by influenza. 

Also, the explanations and statements of some narrators, made through their own 
exertions  and  interpretations,  which  are  open  to  error,  have  been  mixed  up  with the 
words  of  the  Hadith.  Their  words  have  been  supposed  to  be  part  of  the Hadith, and 
the meaning has been obscured. It does not appear to be conformable with reality and 
in a way has become allegorical. 

Also,  in  early  times  the  social  collectivity  and  its  collective  personality  had  not 
developed  as  it  has  at  the  present  and  the  idea  of  the  isolated  individual  was 
predominant,  the  extensive  attributes  and  widescale  actions  of  the  community, 
therefore, were ascribed to the persons who led them. In order to be worthy and fitting 
for superhuman, universal attributes, those persons had to have gigantic bodies and be 
of vast stature and have colossal power and strength a hundred times surpassing their 
own, so that is how they were depicted. This was not conformable with reality, and the 
narration became allegorical. 

Also, although the circumstances and attributes of the two Antichrists differ from 
each  other,  they  have  been  confused  in  narrations  that  have  come  down  to  us  in 
absolute form; one has been supposed to be the other. Also, the circumstances of the 
Great  Mahdi  do  not  fit  the  narrations  alluding  to  the  earlier  Mahdis,  and  these  have 
become allegorical Hadiths. Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) mentions only 
the Islamic Antichrist. 

This marks the end of the Introduction. Now we embark on the ‘Matters’. 

                                             

Mustadrak, iv, 529-30. 

12 Tirmidhi, Fitan, 62; Abu Da’ud, Malahim, 14; Musnad, iii, 420; iv, 226; al-Hakim, al-

 

102

 [Now, with Divine assistance, out of hundreds of examples of those hidden 
events  of  ‘the  Unseen’,  twenty-three  ‘Matters’  will  be  explained  extremely 
concisely, since they have been spread by atheists with the idea of corrupting 
the  beliefs  of  the  ordinary  people.  I  beseech  dominical  mercy  that  these 
‘Matters’  will  cause  no  harm,  as  the  atheists  surmised,  but  that  when  it  is 
seen 
is  a  miraculous  prophetic  utterance  and  their  true 
interpretations  are  proved  and made  clear, they will be an important means 
of  strengthening  the  belief  of  the  ordinary  people.  And  I  entreat  my 
Compassionate Sustainer to forgive my faults and errors.] 

that  each 

 

103

The Second Station 
of the Fifth Ray 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 

FIRST MATTER 

There  is  a  narration  which  says:  “The  hand  of  the  Sufyan,  one  of  the  prominent 

figures of the end of time, will be pierced.” 

God  knows  best,  an  interpretation  of  this  is  as  follows:  if  a  person  is  very 
extravagant, indulging in dissipated amusements, he cannot hold onto his possessions; 
they are poured away with his wastefulness. It is said in the proverb: “So-and-so has a 
hole in his hand.” That is, he is very extravagant and wasteful. 

Thus, this Hadith infers that the Sufyan will bind people to himself by encouraging 
them  to  be wasteful. And by arousing in them an intense greed and ambition, he will 
hold  them  in  subjection  through  that  weak  vein  of  character.  It  predicts  that  the 
extravagant will become captive to him, and fall into his trap. 

SECOND MATTER 

It  says  in  a  narration:  “A  fearsome  person  at  the  end  of  time  will  rise  in  the 

morning and on his forehead will be written ‘This is a disbeliever.’”13 

God knows what is right, this may be interpreted as follows: the Sufyan will wear 
the headgear of non-believers, and make everyone else wear it. However, since it will 
be generally adopted under compulsion and the force of the law, when that headgear is 
taken into prostration [in worship], it will become rightly-guided, God willing, so that 
those who wear it —unwillingly— will not become unbelievers. 

                                             

249, 250; v, 38, 404-5; vi, 139-40. 

13 Bukhari, Fitan, 26; Muslim, Fitan, 101, 102; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 62; Musnad, iii, 115, 211, 228, 

 

104

THIRD MATTER 

There  is  a  narration:  “The  despotic  rulers  of  the  end  of  time,  especially  the 

Antichrist (Dajjal), will have false paradises and hells.”14 

The knowledge is with God, an interpretation is this: it is an indication that of the 
prison  and  high  school  which  are  situated  opposite  the  government  offices  and  are 
facing each other, one will become an ugly imitation of a huri and youth of Paradise, 
and the other become a dungeon and torture-chamber. 

FOURTH MATTER 

say: Allah! Allah!”15 

There is a narration which says: “At the end of time no one will remain who will 

None knows the Unseen save God, an interpretation of this must be as follows: the 
sufi meeting-places, the places where God’s Name is recited, and the religious schools 
(medrese)  will  be  closed,  and  a  name  other  than  ‘Allah’  will  used  in  the  marks  of 
Islam, such as the call to prayer and iqama. It does not mean that all mankind is going 
to fall into absolute disbelief, for denial of God is as irrational as denying the universe. 
It is not reasonable to suppose it should be thus even with the majority of people, let 
alone all of them. The unbelievers do not deny God, they are in error only concerning 
His attributes. 

Another interpretation is this: so that they do not experience its terror, the spirits 
of  the  believers  will  be  seized  a  little  previously  to  the  end  of  the  world.  Doomsday 
will erupt over the heads of the unbelievers. 

FIFTH MATTER 

There  is  a  narration:  “At  the  end  of  time,  certain  persons  such  as  the  Antichrist 

(Dajjal) will claim godhead and force others to prostrate before them.”16 

God knows best, an interpretation is this: just as a nomad chieftain who denies the 
king imagines in himself and in other chieftains a small rulership proportionate to their 
power; so those who come to lead the school of Naturalists and Materialists, imagine 
in themselves a sort of lordship proportionate to their power, and to demonstrate their 
power,  make  their  subjects  bow  down  worshipfully  before  themselves  and  their 
statues, and incline their heads. 

                                             

14 Muslim, Fitan, 104, 109; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 33; Musnad, v, 397. 
15 Muslim, Iman, 234; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 35; Musnad, iii, 107, 201, 259. 
16 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 508; Ibn Kathir, Nihayat al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, i, 125-6; 

Musnad, iv, 20; v, 372. 

 

105

SIXTH MATTER 

There is a narration: “The dissension of the end of time will be so terrible that no 
one  will  be  able  to  restrain  themselves.”17  It  is  because  of  this  that  for one thousand 
three  hundred  years,  on  the  command  of  the  Prophet  (PBUH),  all  the  Umma  has 
sought refuge with God from that dissension —“from the dissension of the Antichrist 
and from the dissension of the end of time”— after seeking refuge from the torments 
of the grave.18  

God knows what is best, it may be interpreted like this: the dissension of the end 
of  time  will  draw  souls  to  itself,  captivating  them.  People  will  join  it  voluntarily, 
indeed, eagerly. For example, in Russia, men and women bathe naked together in the 
public baths. And because by nature women have a strong propensity to show off their 
beauty,  they  willingly  throw  themselves  into  that  dissension  and  are  led  astray.  The 
men too, being naturally enamoured of beauty, are defeated by their instinctual souls, 
and  with  drunken  joy,  fall  into  the  fire  and  are  burnt.  Holding  a  fascination,  the 
amusements,  grievous  sins,  and  innovations  of  the  times  such  as  dancing  and  the 
theatre,  draw  the  pleasure-seekers  around  them  like  moths,  intoxicating  them.  But  if 
this occurs through absolute compulsion, the will is negated and it is not even a sin. 

SEVENTH MATTER 

There  is  a  narration:  “The  Sufyan  will  be  an  eminent  scholar;  he  will  fall  into 

misguidance through his learning. Numerous other scholars will follow him.” 

The knowledge is with God, an interpretation is this: although he has no means of 
sovereignty such as strength and power, tribes and peoples, courage and riches, like a 
king,  he  will  win  that  position  through  his  cleverness,  science,  and  political  acumen, 
and through his intelligence he will bewitch the minds of many other scholars, making 
them  dictate  his  wishes.  He  will  attract  numerous  teachers  to  support  him,  and 
pointing out to them the way to an education system stripped of religious instruction, 
will work for its widespread enforcement. 

                                             

Daylami, Musnad al-Firdaws, i, 266. 

127-8, 130-4; Musnad, vi, 139. 

17 Suyuti, al-Fath al-Kabir, i, 315; ii, 185; iii, 9; al-Hawi li’l-Fatawa, ii, 217; Abu ‘Abdullah 

18 Bukhari, Da’wat, 37, 39, 44, 45, 46; Adhan, 149; Jana’iz, 88; Fitan, 26; Muslim, Masajid, 

 

106

EIGHTH MATTER 

Narrations  state  that  the  terrible  dissension  of  the  Antichrist  (Dajjal)  will  occur 

among Muslims, so that all the Umma have sought refuge with God from it. 

None  knows  the  Unseen  save  God,  an  interpretation  is  this:  the  Muslims’ 
Antichrist  is  different.  In  fact,  like  Imam  ‘Ali  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him),  some 
investigative scholars said that the Muslims’ Antichrist (Dajjal) is the Sufyan. He will 
appear  from  among  the  Muslims  and will carry out his work through deception. The 
Great Dajjal of the unbelievers is different.19 For those who do not bow to the absolute 
force  and  compulsion  of  the  Great  Dajjal  are  martyrs,  and  those  who  submit 
unwillingly are not unbelievers, and not sinners, even. 

NINTH MATTER 

In  narrations,  the  events  associated  with  the  Sufyan  and  those  of  the  future  are 

depicted as occurring in the region of Damascus and in Arabia. 

God  knows  best,  an  interpretation  is  this:  since  in  early  times  the  centres  of  the 
Caliphate  were  in  Iraq,  Damascus,  and  Medina,  on  their  own  interpretations,  the 
narrators showed these events as occurring close to the centre of Islamic government, 
as  though  it  was  always  going  to remain thus, and said Aleppo and Damascus. They 
added their own details to the succinct predictions of the Hadith. 

TENTH MATTER 

Narrations mention the extraordinary power of the figures of the end of time. 
The  knowledge  is with  God,  its  interpretation  is  this,  that  it  is  an  allusion  to the 
vast  collective  personality  those  figures  represent.  At  one  time,  the  Commander-in-
Chief of  the Japanese Army, which had defeated Russia, was shown in a picture with 
one  foot  in  the  Pacific  Ocean  and  the  other  foot  in  the  fort  of  Port  Arthur.  The 
vastness  of its collective personality was depicted in the  representation of his person, 
and in the gigantic form of the representation. As for their extraordinarily vast power, 
since  most  of  the  affairs  they  carry  out  are  destructive  and  related  to  the  appetites, 
they appear to have extraordinary power, for destruction is easy; one match can burn 
down  a  village.  As  for  the  satisfying  the  animal  appetites,  since  it  is  what  the 
instinctual soul wants, it is much sought after. 

                                             

19 Suyuti, al-‘Urf al-Wardi fi Akhbar al-Mahdi (al-Hawi li’l-Fatawa), ii, 234; Ahmad Zayni 
Dahlan, al-Futuhat al-Islamiyya, 294; al-Barzanji, al-Isha’a fi Ashrat al-Sa’a, 95-9; Ibn Hajar al-
Haythami, al-Fatawa al-Hadithiyya, 36; al-Qurtubi, Mukhtasar al-Tadhkira, 133-4. 

 

107

ELEVENTH MATTER 

women.”20 

There is a narration which says: “At the end of time, one man will look after forty 

God knows what is best, this may be interpreted in two ways: 
Firstly:  Lawful  marriage  will  decrease  at  that  time,  or  like  in  Russia,  it  will 
disappear.  Someone  who  flees  from  being  tied  to one woman, will remain at a loose 
end, and become a shepherd to forty unfortunate women. 

The Second: It is an allusion that at that time of dissension, most of the men will 
perish in wars, and for some reason most of the children born will be girls. Perhaps as 
well, the total freedom of women will so inflame their lust that they will acquire innate 
superiority  over  their  menfolk.  This  will  result  in  their  causing  their  children  to  take 
after them, and through the Divine command, girl children will be more numerous. 

TWELFTH MATTER 

It  says  in  narrations  :  “The  Dajjal’s  first  day  will  be  a  year,  his  second  day  a 

month, his third day a week, and his fourth day a day.”21 

None knows the Unseen save God, this may be interpreted in two ways: 
The  First:  It  is  an  allusion  and  sign  that  the  Great  Dajjal  will  appear  near  the 
North  Pole  or  towards  the  north.  For  close to  the  North  Pole  the whole  year  is  one 
day and one night. If he comes a day’s journey in this direction by train in the summer, 
for  a  month the sun never sets. If he comes a day further in this direction, the sun is 
visible for a whole  week. When I was a prisoner-of-war in Russia I was close to this 
region. That means it foretells miraculously that the Great Dajjal will attack from the 
North in this direction. 

The  Second Interpretation: The three days refer to both the Great Dajjal and the 
Islamic  Dajjal  having  three  periods  of  despotism.  With  elevated  eloquence  it  informs 
the  Umma  that  “in  his  first  day;  in  his  first  period  of  government,  he  will  perform 
works so great they could not be performed in three hundred years. On his second day, 
that is, in his second period, he will carry out such works as could not be carried out in 
thirty years. In his third day and period, the transformations he will bring  

                                             

20  Bukhari, Nikah, 110. For Hadiths stating that one man will look after fifty women, see, 
Bukhari, ‘Ilm, 21; Ashriba, 1; Muslim, ‘Ilm, 9; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 34; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 25; Musnad, iii, 
98, 176, 202, 213-4, 273, 289. 

21 Muslim, Fitan, 110; Abu Da’ud, Malahim, 14; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 59; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 33; 

Musnad, iv, 181. 

 

108

about could not be brought about in ten  years. While in his fourth day and period he 
will be reduced to the ordinary and do nothing, only try to maintain his position.” 

THIRTEENTH MATTER 

kill the Great Dajjal.”22 

There  is  a  definite,  sound  narration  which  says: “Jesus (Peace be upon him) will 

The knowledge is with God, there are two aspects to this: 
The First Aspect: It could only be a wondrous person with the power of miracles 
who could kill and change the way  of the awesome Dajjal, who will preserve himself 
through wonders, bestowed on him by God in order to lead him astray, such as magic, 
hypnotic powers, and spiritualism, and will spellbind everyone. And that person will be 
Jesus (Peace be upon him), who is the prophet of the majority of mankind, and whom 
most people follow. 

The  Second  Aspect  is  this:  It  will  be  the  truly pious followers of Jesus who will 
kill  the  gigantic  collective  personality  of  materialism  and  irreligion  which  the  Dajjal 
will form —for the Dajjal will be killed by Jesus’ (PUH) sword— and destroy his ideas 
and disbelief, which are atheistic. Those truly pious Christians will blend the essence of 
true  Christianity  with  the  essence  of  Islam  and  rout  the  Dajjal  with  their  combined 
strength, in effect killing him. The narration: “Jesus (Peace be upon him) will come and 
will perform the obligatory prayers behind the Mahdi and follow him,”23 alludes to this 
union, and to the sovereignty of the Qur’an and its being followed. 

FOURTEENTH MATTER 

Jews will follow him willingly.”24 

It says in a narration: “The Dajjal will draw his main strength from the Jews. The 

God  knows  best,  we can say that in part this narration’s meaning was fulfilled in 
Russia,  for  the  Jews,  who  have  been  persecuted  by  every  state,  gathered  in  large 
numbers in Germany in order to take their revenge. Then, due to the important role he 
played in the founding of the revolutionary communist party, the terrible Trotsky, who 
was  a  Jew, took over the leadership of the Russian Army, then the government after 
the famous Lenin, who had trained him, and they set fire to Russia and laid waste  

                                             

22 Tirmidhi, Fitan, 62; Abu Da’ud, Malahim, 14; Musnad, iii, 420; iv, 226; al-Hakim, al-

23 Bukhari, Anbiya’, 49; Muslim, Iman, 244-5, 247; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 33; Musnad, ii, 336; iii, 

Mustadrak, iv, 529-30. 

368. 

24 Muslim, Fitan, 124; Musnad, iii, 224, 292; iv, 216-7. 

 

109

whatever  it  had  achieved  over  a  thousand  years.  They  showed  that  they  were  the 
secret  revolutionary  committee of the Dajjal and they carried out some of his works. 
They caused serious upheavals in other countries as well, and fomented much trouble. 

FIFTEENTH MATTER 

The events involving Gog and Magog are mentioned concisely in the Qur’an, and 
there  are  some  details  of  them  in  narrations.  Those  details  are  not  firmly  established 
like  the  concise  but  incontrovertible  matters  of  the  Qur’an,  and  may  be  considered 
allegorical.  They  require  interpretation.  Indeed,  they  need  to  be  interpreted,  for  the 
narrators’ interpretations have been mixed in with them. 

Yes, None knows the Unseen save God, one interpretation is this: it is an allusion 
and  indication  that  just  as  the  Manchurian  and  Mongol  tribes,  which  in  the  heavenly 
tongue of the Qur’an are called “Gog and Magog,”25 together with some other tribes, 
several times overturned Asia and Europe; so will they again cause chaos in the world 
in  the  future.  In  fact  even  now  some  of  them  are  famous  anarchists,  and  anarchy  is 
born of communism. 

Yes, socialism sprang up in the French Revolution from the seed of libertarianism. 
Then  since  socialism  destroyed  certain  sacred  matters,  the  ideas  it  inculcated  turned 
into  bolshevism.  And  because  bolshevism  corrupted  even  more  sacred  moral  and 
human values, and those of the human heart, of course the seeds it sowed will produce 
anarchy, which recognizes no restrictions whatsoever and has respect for nothing. For 
if  respect  and  compassion  quit  the  human  heart,  those  with  such  hearts  become 
exceedingly cruel beasts and can no longer be governed through politics. Just the place 
for  the  idea  of  anarchy  will  be  those  oppressed,  numerous  raiding  tribes,  which  are 
backward  in  respect  of  both  civilization  and  government.  The  people  who  fit  those 
conditions  are  the  Manchurian,  Mongol,  and  some  of  the Kirghiz tribes,  who caused 
the building of the Great Wall of China, which is forty-days’ distance in length and is 
one  of  the seven wonders of the world. Expounding  the Qur’an’s concise statements 
about them, Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) predicted their appearance 
miraculously and precisely. 

SIXTEENTH MATTER 

It  says  in  a  narration  in  connection  with  Jesus  (Peace  be  upon  him)  killing  the 

Dajjal: “The Dajjal will have a colossal form, he will be  

                                             

25 See, Qur’an, 18:94, 21:96. 

 

110

extraordinarily  big  and  taller  than  a  minaret,  while  Jesus  (PUH)  will be very small in 
comparison.”26 

None knows the Unseen save God, one interpretation must be as follows: it is an 
allusion  and  sign  that  quantitively  the  spiritual  community  of  muja\hidên  who  will 
recognize  Jesus  (Peace  be  upon  him)  and  follow  him,  will  be  very  few  and  small 
comparatively to the ‘scientific’, physical armies of the Dajjal. 

SEVENTEENTH MATTER 

It says in a narration: “The day the Dajjal appears all the world will hear. He will 

travel the world in forty days and have a wondrous ass.”27 

God  knows  best,  on  condition  such  narrations  are  completely  sound,  they 
miraculously  predict  that  in  the  time  of  the  Dajjal,  the  means  of  communication  and 
travel  will  have  so  advanced  that  an  event  will  be  heard  by  all the world in a  day. It 
will  be  shouted  out  by  the radio and will be heard in east and west,  and will be read 
about in all the newspapers. One man will travel the whole world in forty days and see 
the  seven  continents  and  seventy  countries.  These  narrations  thus  miraculously 
foretold  the  telegraph,  telephone,  radio,  railway,  and  aeroplane  ten  centuries  before 
they appeared. 

Moreover,  the  Dajjal  will  be  heard  not  in  his  capacity  as  the  Dajjal,  but  as  a 
despotic king. And his travelling everywhere will not be to occupy those places, but to 
create dissension and to seduce people away from the right path. His mount or ass is 
either  a  railway train, one ear and head of which is an infernal firebox, and the other 
ear  of  which  is  a  false  paradise  gorgeously  adorned  and  furnished.  He  sends  his 
enemies  to  its fiery head, and his friends to its feasting head. Or else his  mount is an 
awesome motor car, or a plane, or... (silence!) 

EIGHTEENTH MATTER 

There is a narration which says: “If my community advances on the straight path, 

it will have one day.”28 That is, in accordance with the meaning of the verse,  

On  a  day  the  space  whereof  will  be  [as]  a  thousand  years  of  your 
reckoning,29 

                                             

26 Ibn Kathir, Nihayat al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, i, 103-4; ‘Ala’ al-Din al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, 

xiv, 330; Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur, v, 355; al-Hawi li’l-Fatawa, ii, 588; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-
Zawa’id, viii, 244. 

27 Ibn Kathir, Nihayat al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, i, 106; Ibn Abi Shayba, al-Musannaf, vii, 495-

500. 

28 Abu Da’ud, Malahim, 18; Musnad, i, 170; iv, 193. 
29 Qur’an, 32:5. 

 

111

it  will  have  rule  and  splendour  for  a  thousand  years.  If  it  does  not  proceed  on  the 
straight  path,  it  will  have  a  day  of  five  hundred  years,  and  will  be  dominant  and 
victorious for only five hundred years. 

God knows best, this narration is not giving news of the end of the world, but of 
Islam’s  victorious  rule  and  the  sovereignty  of  the  Caliphate,  for  miraculously,  that  is 
exactly how it turned out. For because towards the end of the ‘Abbasid Caliphate its 
politicians  lost  their  sense  of  direction,  it  continued  only  five  hundred  years.  But 
because  the  Umma  in  general  did  not  deviate  from  the  straight  path,  the  Ottoman 
Caliphate  came  to  its  assistance  and  it  took  over  the  rule  of  the  Umma,  which  has 
continued  in  existence  for  one  thousand  three  hundred  years.  Then  because  the 
Ottoman politicians were unable to maintain their direction, its Caliphate survived only 
five  hundred  years  (as  the  Caliphate),  and  with  its  demise  it  confirmed  the  Hadith’s 
miraculous prediction. This Hadith has been discussed in other treatises, so we curtail 
the discussion here. 

NINTEENTH MATTER 

In  the  narrations  are  various  different  prophecies about the Mahdi (May  God be 
pleased  with  him),  who  is  one  of  the  signs  of  the  end  of  time  and  will  be  from  the 
Family  of  the  Prophet.  In  fact,  some  scholars  and  saints  stated  long  ago  that  he  had 
appeared. 

God knows best what is right, one interpretation of these various narrations is this: 
the Great Mahdi will have numerous functions. He will carry out duties in the world of 
politics, the world of religion, the world of government, and in the many spheres of the 
world of jihad. Similarly, since every century at a time of despair people are in need of 
a sort of Mahdi to strengthen their morale or for the possibility of a Mahdi appearing 
at that time to assist them, through Divine mercy, every age or perhaps every century a 
sort  of  Mahdi  has  appeared  from  among  the  Prophet’s  (PBUH)  descendants,  and 
preserved  his  forefather’s  Shari‘a  and  revived  his  Sunna.  The  narrations  about  the 
Mahdi  are  various  because  Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him)  saw 
persons  who  would  perform  some  of  the  Great  Mahdi’s  works;  for  example,  the 
‘Abbasid  Mahdi  in  the  world  of  politics,  and  Gawth  al-A‘zam,30  Shah  Naqshband,31 
the four spiritual poles,32 and Twelve Imams in the world of religion. For this reason 
some  of  the  people  of  reality  said  that  he  had  already  appeared.  Anyway,  since  this 
matter has been explained in the Risale-i Nur, we refer discussion of it to that and here 
only say this: 

                                             

30 Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir Gilani (Geylani) (470/1077-561/1166), founder of the Qadiri Order. 
31 Shaykh Baha’ al-Din Naqshband (d. 791/1389), founder of the Naqshbandi Order. 
32 Four spiritual poles: Ahmad al-Rufa’i, Ahmad al-Badawi, Ibrahim al-Dassuqi, and Abu’l 

Hasan al-Shazali. 

 

112

There  is  no  family  in  the  world  so  mutually  supportive,  nor  a  tribe  in  such 
agreement, nor so enlightened a community or society as the family, tribe, community 
and society of the Prophet’s Family. 

Yes,  the  Prophet’s  Family  has  raised  hundreds  of  sacred  heroes,  and  produced 
thousands of spiritual leaders of the Umma, and has been nurtured with the leaven of 
the reality of the Qur’an and the light of belief and honour of Islam, and has thus been 
perfected.  It  is  therefore  totally  reasonable  that  through  reviving  the  Shari‘a  of 
Muhammad  (PBUH)  and  his  Sunna  and  the  reality  of  the  Qur’an  at  the end of time, 
and proclaiming them and putting them into practice, they should display to the world 
the perfect justice and veracity of the Great Mahdi, their Commander-in-Chief. This is 
also both necessary and essential and demanded by the principles of human society. 

TWENTIETH MATTER 

(Dabbat al-Ard).34  

The  sun  rising  in  the  west33  and  the  emergence  from  the  earth  of  the  Beast 

The sun rising in the west will be a self-evident sign of the end of the world, and 
because  it  is  self-evident,  it  will  be  a  heavenly  event  which  closes  the  door  of 
repentance, which is tied to the will and reason. Its meaning is therefore clear, and is in 
no need of interpretation. One may just say the following: 

God  knows best, its apparent cause will be this: with the disappearance from the 
head  of  the  earth  of  the  Qur’an,  which  is  like  its  intelligence,  the  earth  will  go  mad. 
With  Divine  permission,  on  another  planet  colliding  with  it,  its  rotation  will  be 
reversed.  Through  Divine  will,  its  journeying  from  west  to  east  will  be  reversed  to 
from east to west, and the sun will start to rise in the west. Yes, the Qur’an is ‘the firm 
cord of God’35 which binds the earth to the sun, and the ground to the Divine Throne. 
If its gravity is broken, the string holding the earth would be undone, it would become 
dizzy and deranged, and with its reversed uncontrolled motion, the sun would rise in 
the  west.  There  is  another  interpretation,  which  is  that due to a collision, Doomsday 
would break forth at the Divine command. 

                                             

33 Bukhari, Fitan, 25; Tafsir al-Sura, vi, 9; Riqaq, 40; Musnad, Tawba, 31; Iman, 248-9; Fitan, 
39, 40, 118, 128-9; Abu Da’ud, Jihad, 2; Malahim, 11-2; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 21; Tafsir al-Sura, vi, 8-9; 
Ibn Maja, Fitan, 25, 28, 32; Darimi, Siyar, 69; Musnad, i, 192; ii, 164, 201; iii, 31; iv, 6-7. 

34 Muslim, Iman, 249; Fitan, 39-40, 118, 129; Abu Da’ud, Malahim, 11-2; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 21; 

Tafsir al-Sura, vi, 9; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 28, 31, 32; Musnad, ii, 164, 201, 295; iv, 6-7; v, 268, 357. 

35 See, Qur’an, 3:103. 

 

113

As  for  the  Beast  (Dabbat  al-Ard),  in  the  Qur’an  is  an  extremely  concise 
indication, a brief expression made by its tongue of disposition. As for its details, like 
with some other matters, I do not know with any certainty for the present. I can only 
say this much: None knows the Unseen save God, just as the people of Pharaoh were 
visited  by plagues of locusts and fleas, and the people of Abraha, who were trying to 
destroy  the  Ka‘ba,  were  attacked  by  “flights  of  birds;”36  so  too,  for  the  purpose  of 
bringing  to  their  senses  those  people  who  knowingly  and  willingly  rebel  due  to  the 
dissension  of  the  Sufyan  and  Dajjals,  and  through  the  anarchy  of  Gog  and  Magog 
embark  on  corruption  and  savagery,  and  fall  into  irreligion,  disbelief,  and  denial,  a 
beast will emerge from the earth and beset and rout them. God knows best, that beast 
is a species. For even if huge, a single creature could not be everywhere. That means 
there will be a truly terrible species of animal. Perhaps, as indicated by the verse, 

Except a little worm of the earth, which kept [slowly] gnawing away at his staff,37 
that  creature  will  be  a  sort  of  termite,  called  “Dabbat  al-Ard,”  which  will  gnaw 
away  at  the  bones  of  men  as  though  they  were  wooden,  establishing  themselves  in 
every part of their bodies, from their teeth to their finger-nails. By making the creature 
speak on the question of belief, the verse38 indicates that through the blessing of belief 
and their avoiding vice and abuses, the believers will be saved from it. 

O our Sustainer! Do not take us to task if we forget or do wrong.39 

Glory  be  unto  You!  We  have  no  knowledge  save  that  which  you  have  taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.40 

                                             
36 See, Qur’an, 105:3-4. 
37 Qur’an, 34:14. 
38 See, Qur’an, 27:82. 
39 Qur’an, 2:286. 
40 Qur’an, 2:32. 

 

114

Three Brief Matters 
Complementing the Previous Twenty Matters 

FIRST MATTER 

Just as in some narrations, Jesus (Peace be upon him) is called “the Messiah” (al-
Masih),  so  are  both  Dajjals called Messiah, and in all the narrations it says: “... from 
the dissension of the Messiah Antichrist (al-Masih al-Dajjal) ... from the dissension of 
the  Messiah  Antichrist  (al-Masih  al-Dajjal).”  What  is  the  wisdom  and  meaning  of 
this? 

The  Answer:  God  knows  best,  the  wisdom  in  it  is  this:  just  as  at  the  Divine 
command,  Jesus (Peace be upon  him) abrogated some of the burdensome ordinances 
of the Mosaic Law, making lawful some things agreeable to the appetites like wine, so 
too at the command of Satan and due to his temptations, the Great Dajjal will abrogate 
the  injunctions  of  the  Christian  Law,  and  destroying  the  bonds  in  accordance  with 
which  the  life  of  Christian  society  is  administered,  he  will  prepare  the  ground  for 
anarchy  and  Gog  and  Magog.  Similarly,  the  Sufyan,  the  Islamic  Dajjal,  due  to  the 
devices  of  Satan  and  the  evil-commanding  soul,  will  try  to  abrogate  some  of  the 
eternal injunctions of the Shari‘a of Muhammad (PBUH), and destroying the material 
and  spiritual  bonds  of  human  life,  and  leaving  headstrong,  drunken,  giddy  souls 
without  restriction,  he  will  unfasten  the  luminous  chains  of  respect  and  compassion. 
By giving people a freedom which is pure despotism so they fall  on one another in a 
swamp of putrid lust, he will open up the way to a terrible anarchy. There will then be 
no  way  those  people  can  be  kept  under  control  other  than  by  the  most  repressive 
despotism. 

SECOND MATTER 

Mentioned  in  the  narrations  are  the  wondrous  achievements  of  the  two  Dajjals, 
and  their  superhuman  power  and  majesty.  It  is  foretold  even  that  some  unfortunates 
will ascribe a sort of godhead to them. What is the reason for this? 

The Answer: The knowledge is with God, their achievements being so great and 
extraordinary  is  because  since  they  mostly  consist  of  destruction  and  exciting  the 
appetites, they carry out those works easily, so that it says in one narration: “A single 
of  their  days  is  a  year.”  That  is,  the  works  they  carry  out  in  one  year  would  not 
normally  be  carried  out  in  three  hundred.  There  are  four  aspects  of  and  reasons  for 
their power appearing to be superhuman: 

• The First: Since, as the result of a Divine scheme permitting them to  

 

115

do so, the good things and advances which are achieved through the strength of brave 
armies and active nations in their despotic, huge states, are unjustly attributed to them, 
it  leads  to  their  persons  being  imagined  to  have  the  power  of  a  thousand  men.  But 
rightfully  and  according  to  the  rules,  the  positive  good,  honour,  and  booty  won 
through  the  actions  of  a  community  should  be  divided  among  the  community  and 
given to its members. And any  evils, destruction, and  losses should  be ascribed to its 
leader’s lack of precautions and faults. For  example,  if a batallion conquers a citadel, 
the  booty  and  honour  is  due  to  their  bayonets.  While  if  there  are  any  losses  due  to 
faulty planning, they are the commander’s. 

Thus,  entirely  contrarily  to  this  fundamental  principle  of  truth  and  reality,  since 
positive  progress  and  all  things  good  are  ascribed  to  those  fearsome  leaders,  and 
negative  developments  and  evils  are  attributed  to  their  unfortunate  peoples,  as  the 
result of a Divine scheme, those persons, who deserve to be abominated by everyone, 
are loved by all the heedless and neglectful. 

•  The  Second  Aspect  and  Reason:  Because  both  Dajjals  employ  the  severest 
despotism, the greatest tyranny, and the maximum violence and terror, they appear to 
have vast power. Yes, a despotism so extraordinary that under the cloak of laws, they 
intervene  in  everyone’s  consciences  and  religious beliefs, and even their clothes. It is 
my guess that with a premonition of the future the lovers of freedom at the end of the 
last  century  perceived  this  awesome  despotism,  and  letting  fly  their  arrows  at  it, 
attacked it. But they were sorely misled and attacked on the wrong front. It is tyranny 
and  coercion  so  great  that  it  wipes  out  a  hundred  villages  because  of  one  man, 
punishing hundreds of innocent people and ruining them by forced migrations. 

• The Third Aspect and Reason: Because both Dajjals will win the assistance of a 
secret  Jewish  society  which  nurtures  a  terrible  desire  for  revenge  on  Islam  and 
Christianity,  and  that  of  another  secret  society  which  uses  women’s  liberation  as  a 
screen,  and  because  the  Islamic Dajjal will deceive  even the Masonic lodges and win 
their  support,  they  will  be  supposed  to  possess  tremendous  power.  Also,  it  is 
understood  from  the  divinations  of  some  of  the  saints  that  the  Dajjal  called  Sufyan 
who will come to lead the Islamic world will be a leading politician who is extremely 
capable,  intelligent,  and  active,  does  not  like  ostentation  and  gives  no  importance  to 
personal  rank  and  glory;  he  will  be  a  military  leader  who  is extremely bold, forceful, 
energetic,  and  resolute,  and  does  not  condescend  to  fame-seeking,  and  he  will 
captivate the Muslims. Taking advantage of their lack of hypocrisy, he will have their 
extraordinarily brilliant works ascribed to himself, as well as the progress they have  

 

116

achieved driven by the severe need arising from the transformation and renewal of the 
large  army  and  state  and  the  upheavals  of  the  First  World  War,  and  he  will  have  it 
bruited  everywhere  by  eulogists  that  he  possesses  a  wondrous  and  extraordinary 
power. 

•  The  Fourth  Aspect  and  Reason:  The  Great  Dajjal  will  have  spellbinding, 
charismatic qualities. While the Islamic Dajjal will have fascinating, hypnotic powers in 
one eye. It even says in narrations: “The Dajjal will be blind in one eye.”41 By drawing 
attention to this and pointing out that one of the Great Dajjal’s eyes will be blind, and 
one eye of the other Dajjal will be blind in comparison with his other eye, the Hadith is 
indicating that since they will be absolute unbelievers, they will have only one eye and 
their  sight  will  be  restricted  to  this  world,  and  they  will  have  no  eyes  that  see  the 
hereafter and consequences of actions. 

I too saw the Islamic Dajjal in a spirit world. I observed with my own eyes that he 
possessed a spellbinding hypnotic power in one of his eyes, and I understood him to be 
a  total  denier  of  God.  He  will  attack  religion  and  the  sacred  with  a  boldness  and 
insolence arising from his absolute denial. But since the ordinary people will not know 
the truth of the matter, they will suppose it to be an extraordinary power and courage. 
Also,  because  such  a  magnificent,  lucky,  successful,  and  cunning  commander, 
who  is  merely  being  led  on  by  God,  appears  at  the  time  of  a  heroic  and  glorious 
nation’s defeat, with their love of heroism the people will applaud and fete him without 
considering  his  hidden,  terrible  true  nature,  and  will  want  to  cover  up  his  iniquities. 
However, it is understood from narrations that through the light of belief and light of 
the  Qur’an  in  their  spirits,  the  heroic,  mujahid  army and religious nation will see the 
truth and will try to repair that commander’s terrible destruction. 

THE THIRD BRIEF MATTER 

This consists of three instructive incidents. 
First Incident: One time, God’s Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon 
him) pointed out to ‘Umar (May God be pleased with him) one of a group of Jewish 
children,  and  said:  “He  is  his  very  image!”  ‘Umar  said:  “Then  I  shall  kill  him!”  But 
God’s  Messenger  (PBUH)  replied:  “If  that  is  the  Sufyan,  the  Islamic  Dajjal,  you 
cannot kill him. And if it is not, he cannot be killed through his image.”42 

                                             

41 Bukhari, Fitan, 26; Anbiya’, 77; Muslim, Fitan, 100, 109; Abu Da’ud, Malahim, 14; Sunna, 

25; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 56, 62; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 33; Muwatta, Sifat al-Nabi, 1; Musnad, i, 176, 182, 240, 
311; ii, 22, 27, 37, 39, 122, 124, 127, 131, 144, 154, 159; iii, 79, 103, 115, 173, 233, 333; iv, 139-40; 
v, 13, 383, 397. 

42 Bukhari, Jana’iz, 80; Jihad, 178; Muslim, Fitan, 85, 86, 95; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 63. 

 

117

This narration indicates that at the time of his rule, the Sufyan’s image will appear 
on numerous things, and that he will be born a Jew. It is strange that although ‘Umar 
(May God be pleased with him) was sufficiently angry and hostile towards him to be 
able  to  kill  a  child  resembling  him,  someone  the  Sufyan  most  admired  and  liked  and 
spoke off with praise and appreciation turned out to be ‘Umar. 

Second  Incident:  Many  people  narrated  that  the  Islamic  Dajjal  will  be  curious 

about the meaning of the Sura, By the fig and the olive,43 and will ask about it. 

It is strange but the verse Nay, but man transgresses all bounds44 in the following 
Sura,  Read!  In  the  name  of  your  Sustainer,45  according  to  jafr  reckoning  and  its 
meaning,  also  indicates  his  time  and  person,  pointing  out  that  he  will  overweeningly 
aggress against  the mosques and the people who perform the prayers. That is to say, 
that  man,  who  is being led on by God, perceives that a short Sura is concerned with 
him, but makes a mistake and knocks on its neighbour’s door. 

Third  Incident:  It  says  in  a  narration:  “The  Islamic  Dajjal  will  appear  in 

Khorasan.”46  

None  knows  the  Unseen  save  God,  an  interpretation  of  it  is  this:  the  Turks,  the 
bravest  and  most  numerous  and  powerful  people  of  the  east  and  the  heroic  army  of 
Islam,  were  at  the  time  of  the  narration,  around  the  region  of  Khorasan and had not 
yet  made  their  homeland  in  Anatolia.  By  mentioning  the  region  they  inhabited,  it  is 
indicating that the Sufyan Dajjal would appear from among them. 

It is strange, exceedingly strange, he will temporarily try to use the Turkish nation 
and  Turkism,  which  for  seven  hundred  years  has  been  a  flashing  diamond  sword,  a 
mark  of  honour,  in  the  hand  of  Islam  and  the Qur’an,  against  some  of  the  marks  of 
Islam.  But  he  will  not  be  successful  and  will  withdraw.  It  is  understood  from  the 
narrations that “The heroic army will save it, taking the reins from his hand.” 

And God knows what is best  * None knows the Unseen save God. 

                                             

43 Qur’an, 95:1. 
44 Qur’an, 96:6. 
45 Qur’an, 96:1. 
46 Tirmidhi, Fitan, 57; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 33; Musnad, i, 4, 7; al-Albani, Silsilat al-Ahadith, iv, 

122. 

 

118

The Sixth Ray 

 [This consists of only two Points] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 

 [This Sixth Ray consists of two answers to two questions about two points 
concerning  the  formulas  in  the  ‘tashahhud’  section  of  the  ritual  prayers 
(salat)  which  begin  “Salutations,  blessings,  benedictions  and  supplications, 
and good words—all are God’s.”1 Postponing to another time an explanation 
of the other truths of the ‘tashahhud,’ here we shall explain only two points 
out of hundreds.] 

F i r s t   Q u e s t i o n : The blessed phrases of the tashahhud were spoken by 
Almighty God and His Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him) on the night of 
his Ascension, so what is the reason for their being recited in the ritual prayers? 

T  h  e      A  n  s  w  e  r  :  For  all  believers,  the  five  daily  prayers  are  a  sort  of 
Ascension.  The  words  of  the  tashahhud,  which  were  fitting  for  the  Divine  presence, 
were  spoken  during  the  Supreme  Ascension  of  Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be 
upon him), and by reciting them, believers recall that sacred conversation. Through the 
recollection,  the  meanings  of  those  blessed  words  cease being particular and become 
universal;  their  sacred,  comprehensive  meanings  are,  or  may  be,  conceived  of. 
Through such a conception, their value and light are enhanced and expanded. 

For  example,  instead  of  giving  the  greeting  of  “peace”  that  night  to  Almighty 

God, the Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him)  

                                             

1 “al-tahiyyat al-mubarakat al-salawat al-tayyibat lillah.” Bukhari, Adhan, 148, 150; al-Amal 

fi’l-salat, 4; Istidhan, 3, 28; Da’wat, 16; Tawhid, 5; Muslim, Salat, 56, 60, 62. Etc. 

 

119

said: “Salutations to God” (al-tahiyyatu lillah). That is, “O my Sustainer! All the vital 
glorifications living beings display through their lives and the gifts they present to their 
Maker through the manner of their creation are Yours alone. By visualizing them and 
through my belief, I too offer them to You.” 

Yes,  with  the  word  “salutations,”  God’s  Most  Noble  Messenger  (PBUH) 
intentionally offered to God all the worship living creatures perform through the mode 
of their creation. Similarly, through the word “blessings,” (al-mubarakat) which is the 
summary  of  “salutations,”  he  was  representing  the  natural  blessedness,  plenty,  and 
worship  of  creatures,  especially  seeds,  grains,  and  eggs,  which  are  the  means  of 
blessings and abundance, and cause one to exclaim: “How great are God’s blessings!” 
For they are the essence of life and living beings. He said it with this broad meaning. 

Through 

the  word  “benedictions”  (al-salawat),  which  is  a  summary  of 
“blessings,” he was visualizing all the particular forms of worship performed by beings 
with  spirits,  who are the essence of living beings, and offering it to the Divine Court 
with that comprehensive meaning. 

With the word “good things,” (wa’l-tayyibat) the summary of “benedictions,” he 
intended the luminous, elevated worship of perfected human beings and the cherubim, 
who  are  the  summaries  of  beings  with  spirits,  and  offered  this  to  the  One  he 
worshipped. 

Almighty  God  saying  that  night:  “Peace  be  upon  you,  O  Prophet!”,  was  an 
indication  and  indirect  command  that  in  the  future,  hundreds  of  millions  of  people 
would  say  at  least  ten  times  daily:  “Peace  be  upon  you,  O  Prophet!”  The  Divine 
greeting afforded the words an extensive light and lofty meaning. 

Similarly, the Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him) replying to the 
greeting  by  saying:  “Peace  be  upon  us  and  upon  all  God’s  righteous  servants” 
expressed  that  he  was  requesting  his  Creator  hopefully  and  beseechingly  that  in  the 
future his vast community and the righteous members of it would reflect Islam, which 
represents  the  Divine  greeting,  and  that  all  his  community  would  greet  each  other: 
“Peace  be  upon  you!”  “And  peace  be  upon  you!,”  which,  between  believers,  is  a 
universal mark of Islam. 

Gabriel (Peace be upon him), who took part in the conversation, said that night at 
the  Divine  command:  “I  testify  that  there  is  no  god  but  God,  and  I  testify  that 
Muhammad  is  God’s  Messenger,”  giving  the  happy  news  that  all  the  Umma  would 
testify in that way until the Last Day.  

 

120

Recalling  this  sacred  exchange,  the  meanings  of  the  words  gain  in  brilliance  and 
comprehensiveness. 

A strange state of mind that assisted in the unfolding of the above truth 

One time while in a dark exile, on a dark night, and in a dark state of heedlessness, 
the mighty universe of the present appeared to my imagination as a lifeless, spiritless, 
dead,  empty,  desolate,  ghastly  corpse.  The  past,  too,  appeared  to  be  dead,  empty, 
deceased, and dreadful; that boundless space and limitless time took on the form of a 
dark  wilderness.  I  had  recourse to  the  prayers in order to be saved from my state of 
mind.  When  I  said:  “Salutations”  in  the  tashahhud,  the  universe  suddenly  sprang  to 
life. It was resurrected taking on a living, luminous form, and became a shining mirror 
of the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One. I saw that with all its living parts, it was 
continuously  offering  the  salutations  of  their  lives  and  their  vital  gifts  to  the  Ever-
Living  and  Self-Subsistent  One;  I  understood  this  with  ‘the  knowledge  of  certainty,’ 
even with ‘absolute certainty.’ 

Then,  when  I  declared:  “Peace  be  upon  you,  O  Prophet!,”  that  limitless  vacant 
time  was  transformed  under  the  leadership  of  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Peace  and 
blessings  be  upon  him)  from  being  a  desolate  wilderness  into  a  familiar  place  of 
recreation filled with living spirits. 

S  e c o n d   Q u e s t i o n : The comparison at the end of the tashahhud: “O 
God! Grant blessings to Muhammad and to the Family of Muhammad, as You granted 
blessings  to  Abraham  and to the Family of Abraham,”2 appears to be contrary to  the 
rules of comparisons, for Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) was greater 
than Abraham (Peace be upon him), and the recipient of greater mercy; so what is the 
reason for it? Since early times the same supplication has been repeated in all the ritual 
prayers;  whereas  if  a  prayer  is  accepted  once,  that  is  enough.  If  those  for  whom 
millions of prayers have been accepted are persistently prayed for, and especially if the 
thing sought has been promised by God... For example, Almighty God has promised: 
Soon will your Sustainer raise you to a station of praise and glory!,3 yet always after 
the call to prayer and iqama the narrated prayer:  “And raise him up  to the station of 
praise and glory that You have promised him”4 is repeated; the whole Umma pray for 
that promise to be fulfilled. What is the reason for this too? 

                                             
2 Bukhari, Anbiya’, 10. 
3 Qur’an, 17:79. 
4 ‘Station of Praise and Glory’ — al-Maqam al-Mahmud: Bukhari, Adhan, 8, 17; Tirmidhi, 

Mawaqit, 43; Salat, 42; Abu Da’ud, Salat, 37; Nasa’i, Adhan, 38; Ibn Maja, Adhan, 4; Iqama, 25; 
Musnad, iii, 354. 

 

question. 

121

T  h  e      A  n  s  w  e  r  :  There  are  three  aspects  and  three  questions  within  this 

First  Aspect:  For  sure  Abraham  (Peace  be  upon  him)  was  not  equal  to 
Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him),  but  his  family  or  descendants  were 
prophets.  Muhammad’s  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him)  family  were  saints,  and 
saints  cannot  reach  the  level  of  the  prophets. Evidence  that this prayer for his family 
has been accepted in shining fashion is this: 

The fact that the saints who, among three hundred and fifty million, emerged from 
the  progeny  of  only  two  of  the  Family  of Muhammad  (PBUH),  that  is,  Hasan  (May 
God  be  pleased  with  him)  and  Husayn  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him),  were  in  the 
great majority of cases the spiritual guides and leaders of the sufi paths of reality, was 
because they received the effulgence of the Hadith: “The learned of my community are 
like the prophets of the Children of Israel.”5 Those who guided the greater part of the 
Umma to the way of truth and reality of Islam —foremost Ja‘far al-Sadiq (May God 
be  pleased  with  him),  Gawth  al-A‘zam  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him),  and  Shah 
Naqshband (May God be pleased with him)— were the fruits of the acceptance of this 
prayer for Muhammad’s (Peace and blessings be upon him) Family. 

Second  Aspect:  The  reason  for  benedictions  of  this  sort  being  restricted  to  the 
ritual prayers is that they recall to one that he is on the way opened up and taken by 
the great caravan of the prophets and saints, who are the most luminous, perfect, and 
righteous of mankind and its eminent members. He has joined that vast congregation, 
which acquires strength through its hundredfold consensus and cannot confuse its way, 
and is accompanying it on the straight path. By recalling this, he is saved from satanic 
doubts  and  delusions.  Evidence  that  the  members  of  this  caravan  are  the  friends  and 
acceptable  creatures  of  the  universe’s  Owner,  and  its  opponents  and  enemies  are 
rejected, is that from the time of Adam, succour has always arrived from the Unseen 
for the caravan, while its opponents have always been visited by heavenly calamities. 

Yes, just as opponents like the people of Noah, the Thamud and the ‘Ad, Pharaoh 
and  Nimrod  have  all  received  blows  from  the  Unseen  that  tell  of  Divine  wrath  and 
chastisement;  so  the  sacred  heroes  of  the  mighty caravan,  like  Noah  (Peace  be  upon 
him),  Abraham  (Peace  be  upon  him),  Moses  (Peace  be  upon  him),  and  Muhammad 
(Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him),  have  wondrously  and  extraordinarily  manifested 
miracles and  

                                             

5 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa, ii, 64; Tecrid-i Sarîh Tercemesi (Turk. trans.) Diyanet Isleri, i, 

107. 

 

122

received dominical bounties from the Unseen. A single blow demonstrates anger, and a 
single bestowal, love, so thousands of blows being visited on opponents and thousands 
of  favours  and  instances  of assistance  arriving  for  the  caravan  testify  and  prove self-
evidently,  as  clearly  as  daylight,  the  rightfulness  of  the  caravan  and  that  it  is  on  the 
straight path. The verse: The path of those whom You have blessed in Sura al-Fatiha 
looks  to  the  caravan,  while  the  verses:  Not  those  on  whom  Your  anger  has  been 
visited, nor those who have gone astray6 looks to their opponents. The point we have 
explained here is clearer in the discussion about the end of Sura al-Fatiha. 

Third  Aspect:  The  reason  for  repeatedly  asking  for  something  which  shall 
certainly  be  given  is  this:  the  thing  sought,  for  instance  the  ‘Station  of  Praise  and 
Glory’  is  the  tip  of  something.  It  is  a  branch  of a vast truth that comprises lofty and 
significant truths like thousands of Stations of Praise and Glory. It is a fruit of the most 
important result of the universe’s creation. To seek through prayer the tip, branch, and 
fruit is to seek indirectly the realization of that vast and general truth, and its finding 
existence, and the coming and realization of the eternal realm, the largest branch of the 
tree of creation, and the resurrection of the dead and Last Judgement and the opening 
up of the Abode of Bliss, which are the supreme results of the universe. By asking for 
these, one participates in the worship and prayers of all humanity, the most important 
causes of the existence of Paradise and the Abode of Bliss. These innumerable prayers 
are  indeed  few  for  an  aim  so  unutterably  vast.  Moreover,  Muhammad  (Peace  and 
blessings  be  upon  him)  being  awarded  the  Station  of  Praise  and  Glory  points  to  his 
supreme intercession for all his community. He is concerned also with the happiness of 
all  his  community.  It  is  therefore  pure  wisdom  to  seek  endless  benedictions  and 
prayers for mercy for him from all his community. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.7 

                                             

6 Qur’an, 1:7. 
7 Qur’an, 2:32. 

 

123

The Seventh Ray 
The Supreme Sign1 

AN  IMPORTANT WARNING 
AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE 

Not  everyone  will  be  able  to  understand  all  the  matters  discussed  in  this  most 
significant  treatise,  but  equally  nobody  will  remain  portionless.  If  somebody  enters  a 
garden, he will find that his hands cannot reach all the fruit it contains, but the amount 
that  falls  within  his  grasp  will  be  enough  for  him.  The  garden does not exist for him 
alone; it exists also for those whose arms are longer than his. 

There are five causes making difficult the understanding of this book. 
The  First:    I  have  written  down  my  own  observations,  according  to  my  own 
understanding, and for myself. I have not written according to the understanding and 
conceptions of others, as is the case with other books. 

The Second: Since the true affirmation of Divine unity is set forth in this book, in 
the most comprehensive form, by virtue of a manifestation of the Supreme Name, the 
subjects discussed are extremely broad, extremely profound and sometimes extremely 
long. Not everyone can comprehend these matters all at once. 

The  Third:  Since  each  matter  constitutes  a  great  and  extensive  truth,  a  single 

sentence will sometimes stretch out over a whole page or more, in  

                                             

1 This translation of the Seventh Ray was originally carried out by Hamid Algar, Prof. of Middle 
Eastern Studies in the University of California, Berkeley, USA, and was first published in 1979. It has 
been been in part amended to fit the present work. [Tr.] 

 

124

order  not  to  fracture  the  truth  in  question.  A  single  proof  requires  copious 
preliminaries. 

The  Fourth:  Since  most  of  the  matters  contained  in  the  book  have  numerous 
proofs and evidences, the discussion sometimes becomes prolix through the inclusion 
of  ten  or  twenty  proofs  by  way  of  demonstration.  Limited  intelligences  cannot 
understand this. 

The Fifth:  It is true that the lights of this treatise came to me from the effulgence 
of  Ramadan.  Nonetheless,  I  was  distraught  in  a  number  of  respects,  and  I  wrote the 
book hastily at a time my body was wracked by several illnesses, without revising the 
first draft. I felt, moreover, that I was not writing with my own will and volition, and it 
seemed inappropriate to rearrange or correct what I had written, according to my own 
thoughts.  This,  too,  resulted  in  rendering  the  book  difficult  of  comprehension.  In 
addition, a number of sections in Arabic crept in, and the First Station, written entirely 
in Arabic, was removed and made into a separate work. 

Despite the defects and difficulties arising from these five causes, this treatise has 
such  an  importance  that  Imam  ‘Ali  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him)  miraculously 
foresaw its composition and gave it the names “Supreme Sign” and “Staff of Moses.” 
He  looked upon this part of the Risale-i Nur with special favour, and directed man’s 
gaze toward it.2 The Supreme Sign is a true exposition of the Supreme Verse,3 and it 
constitutes at the same time the Seventh Ray, designated by the Imam as the Staff of 
Moses. 

This  treatise  consists  of  an  Introduction  and two Stations. The Introduction sets 
forth  four  important  matters;  the  First  Station  contains  the  Arabic  portion  of  the 
exposition of the Supreme Verse; and the Second Station consists of the translation of 
that expostion together with the accompanying proofs. 

Too  much  has  been  explained  in  the  following  Introduction,  but  it  was  not  my 
intention  to  lengthen  it  thus.  The  fact  that  it  was  written  at  this  length  indicates the 
existence of a need. Indeed, some people may regard it as too short, despite its length. 

                                                                            S a i d   N u r s i 

                                             

2 The events that took place in Denizli fully confirmed the prediction of Imam ‘Ali concerning 
The Supreme Sign. For the secret printing of this book was the cause of our imprisonment, and the 
triumph of its sacred and most powerful truth was the main cause of our acquittal and deliverance. 
Thus did Imam ‘Ali make manifest his miraculous prediction, and prove the acceptance of the prayer 
he had uttered on our behalf: “By  means of the Supreme Sign, secure me against sudden death!” 

3 See page 130, footnote 7. 

 

125

Introduction 

I created not jinn and mankind except that they might worship me.4 

According to the meaning of this mighty verse, the purpose for the sending of man 
to  this  world  and  the  wisdom implicit in it, consists of recognizing the Creator of all 
beings and believing in Him and worshipping Him. The primordial duty of man and the 
obligation incumbent upon him are to know God and believe in Him, to assent to His 
Being and unity in submission and perfect certainty. 

For  man,  who  by  nature  desires  permanent  life  and  immortal  existence,  whose 
unlimited  hopes  are  matched  by  boundless  afflictions,  any  object  or  accomplishment 
other  than  belief  in  God,  knowledge  of  God    and    the    means    for    attaining  these, 
which are the fundament and key of eternal life — any such object or accomplishment 
must be regarded as lowly for man, or even worthless in many cases. 

Since this truth has been proven with firm evidence in the Risale-i Nur, we refer 
exposition of it to that, setting forth here, within the framework of four questions, only 
two abysses that shake certainty of faith in this age and induce hesitation. 

The means for salvation from the first abyss are these two Matters: 
The First Matter: As proven in detail in the Thirteenth Flash of the Thirty-First 
Letter,  in  general  questions  denial  has  no  value  in the face of proof and is extremely 
weak. For example, with respect to the sighting of the crescent moon at the beginning 
of  Ramadan  the  Noble,  if  two  common  men  prove  the  crescent  to  have  emerged  by 
their witnessing it, and thousands of nobles and scholars deny it, saying: “We have not 
seen  it,”  their  negation  is  valueless  and  without  power  to  convince.  When  it  is  a 
question  of  proof  each  person  strengthens  and  supports  the  other,  and  consensus 
results. But when it is a question of negation, there is no difference between one man 
and  a  thousand.  Each  person  remains  alone  and  isolated.  For  the  one  who  affirms 
looks  beyond  himself  and  judges  the  matter  as  it  is.  Thus  in  the  example  we  have 
given, if one says “The moon is in the sky,” and his friend then points his finger at the 
moon, the two of them unite and are strengthened. 

                                             

4 Qur’an, 51:56. 

 

126

The one who engages in negation and denial, however, does not regard the matter 
as  it  is,  and  is  even  unable  to  do  so.  For  it  is  a  well-known  principle  that  “a  non-
particularized denial, not directed to a particular locus, cannot be proven.” 

For  example,  if  I  affirm  the  existence  of  a  thing  in the world, and you deny it, I 
can  easily  establish  its  existence  with  a  single  indication.  But  for  you  to  justify  your 
negation,  that  is  to  establish  the  non-existence  of the thing — it is necessary to hunt 
exhaustively through the whole world, and even to examine every aspect of past ages. 
Only then can you say, “It does not exist, and never has existed.” 

Since those who negate and deny do not regard the matter as it is but judge rather 
in  the  light  of  their  own  souls,  and  their  own  intelligence  and  vision,  they  can  in  no 
way  strengthen  and  support  each  other.  For  the  veils  and  causes  that  prevent  them 
from  seeing  and  knowing  are various. Anyone can say, “I do not see it; therefore, in 
my  opinion  and  belief,  it  does  not  exist.”  But  none  can  say,  “It  does  not  exist  in 
actuality.” If someone says this —particularly in questions of belief, which look to all 
the  universe—  it  is  a  lie  as  vast  as  the  world  itself,  and  he  who  utters  it  will  be 
incapable both of speaking the truth and of being corrected. 

In  Short:  The  result  is  one  and  single  in  the  case  of  affirmation,  and  every 

instance of affirmation supports all other instances. 

Negation  by  contrast  is  not  one,  but  multiple.  Multiplicity  arises  through  each 
person’s saying concerning himself, “In my opinion and view,” or “In my belief,” and 
leads  to  multiplicity  of  result.  Hence  each  separate  instance  cannot  support  all  other 
instances. 

Therefore, with respect to the truth with which we began, there is no significance 
in  the  multiplicity  and  apparent  predominance  of  the  unbelievers  and  deniers  who 
oppose  belief.  Now  it  is  necessary to refrain from introducing any hesitation into the 
certainty  and  faith  of  a  believer,  but  in  this  age  the  negations  and  denials  of  the 
philosophers of Europe have induced doubt in a number of unfortunate dupes and thus 
destroyed their certainty and obliterated their eternal felicity. Death and the coming of 
one’s appointed hour, which afflict thirty thousand men each day, are deprived of their 
meaning of dismissal from this world and presented as eternal annihilation. The grave 
with its ever-open door, constantly threatens the denier with annihilation and poisons 
his life with the bitterest of sorrows. Appreciate then how great a blessing is faith, and 
the very essence of life. 

The  Second  Matter: With respect to a problem subject to discussion in science 

or art, those who stand outside that science or art cannot speak  

 

127

authoritatively,  however  great,  learned  and  accomplished  they  may  be,  nor  can  their 
judgements be accepted as decisive. They cannot form part of the learned consensus of 
the science. 

For  example,  the  judgement  of  a  great  engineer  on  the  diagnosis  and  cure  of  a 
disease does not have the same value as that of the lowliest physician. In particular, the 
words of denial of a philosopher who is absorbed in the material sphere, who becomes 
continually  more  remote  from  the  non-material  or  spiritual  and  cruder  and  more 
insensitive  to  light,  whose  intelligence  is  restricted  to  what  his  eye  beholds  —  the 
words of such a one are unworthy of consideration and valueless with respect to non-
material and spiritual matters. 

On  matters  sacred  and  spiritual  and  concerning  the  Divine  unity,  there  is  total 
accord  among  the  hundreds  of  thousands  of  the  People  of  Truth,  such  as  Shaykh 
Gilani  (May  his  mystery  be  sanctified), who beheld God’s Sublime Throne while still 
on  the  earth,  who  spent  ninety  years  ad-vancing  in  spiritual  work,  and  who  unveiled 
the truths of belief in all three stations of certainty. This being the case what value have 
the words of philosophers, who through their absorption in the most diffuse details of 
the material realm and the most minute aspects of multiplicity are choking and dazed? 
Are not their denials and objections drowned out like the buzzing of a mosquito by the 
roaring of thunder? 

The essence of the unbelief that opposes the truths of Islam and struggles against 
them  is  denial,  ignorance,  and  negation.  Even  though  it  may  appear  to  be  an 
affirmation of some kind and a manifestation of being, it is in reality negation and non-
being. Whereas belief is knowledge and a manifestation of being; it is affirmation and 
judgement.  Every  negating  aspect  of  belief  is  the  gate  to  a  positive  truth  or  the  veil 
covering  it.  If  the  unbelievers  who  struggle  against  faith  attempt,  with  the  utmost 
difficulty,  to  affirm  and  accept  their  negative  beliefs  in  the  form  of  acceptance  and 
admission of non-being,  then their unbelief may be regarded in one respect as a form 
of  mistaken  knowledge  or  erroneous  judgement.  But  as  for  non-acceptance,  denial, 
and non-admission —something more easily done— it is absolute ignorance and total 
absence of judgement. 

In Short: The convictions underlying unbelief are then of two kinds: 
The  First  pays  no  regard  to  the  truths  of  Islam.  It  is  an  erroneous admission, a 
baseless  belief and a  mistaken acceptance peculiar to itself; it is an unjust judgement. 
This kind of unbelief is beyond the scope of our discussion. It has no concern with us, 
nor do we have any concern with it. 

The  Second  Kind  opposes  the  truths  of  belief  and  struggles  against  them.  It 

consists in turn of two varieties. 

 

128

The  First is  non-acceptance. It  consists  simply  of  not  consenting  to affirmation. 
This is a species of ignorance; there is no judgement in-volved and it occurs easily. It 
too is beyond the scope of our discussion. 

The Second variety is acceptance of non-being. It is to consent to non-being with 
one’s  heart,  and  a  judgement  is  involved.  It  is  a  conviction  and  a  taking  the  part  of 
something. It is on account of this partiality that it is obliged to affirm its negation. 

The negation comprises two types: 
The  First  Type  says:  “A  certain  thing  does  not  exist  at  a  certain  place  or  in  a 
particular  direction.”    This  kind  of  denial  can  be  proved,  and  it  lies  outside  of  our 
discussion. 

The  Second  Type  consists  of  negating  and  denying  those  doctrinal  and  sacred 
matters, general and comprehensive, that concern this world, all beings, the hereafter, 
and  the  succession  of  different  ages.  This  kind  of  negation  cannot  in  any  fashion  be 
substantiated, as we have shown in the First Matter, for what is needed to substantiate 
such  negations  is  a  vision  that  shall  encompass  the  whole  universe,  behold  the 
hereafter, and observe every aspect of time without limit. 

The  Second  Abyss  and  the  means  for  escaping  from  it:  This  too  consists  of 

two matters. 

The  First:  Intelligences  that  become  narrowed  by  absorption  in  neglect  of  God 
and in sin, or the material realm, are unable to comprehend vast matters in respect of 
sublimity,  grandeur,  and  infinity;  hence  taking  pride  in such knowledge as they have, 
they  hasten  to denial  and  negation.  Since  they cannot  encompass  the extremely vast, 
profound  and  comprehensive  questions  of  faith  within  their  straitened  and  dessicated 
intellects,  their  corrupt  and  spiritually  moribund  hearts,  they  cast  themselves  into 
unbelief and misguidance, and choke. 

If  they  were  able  to  look  at  the  true  nature  of  their  unbelief  and  the  essence  of 
their misguidance they would see that, compared to the reasonable, suitable and indeed 
necessary  sublimity  and  grandeur  that  is  present  in  belief,  their  unbelief  conceals and 
contains  manifold  absurdity  and  impossibility.  The  Risale-i  Nur  has proven this truth 
by  hundreds  of  comparisons  with  the  same  finality  that  “two  plus  two  equals  four.” 
For example, one who does not accept the Necessary Being, the pre-eternity, and the 
comprehensiveness  of  attribute  of  God  Almighty,  on  account  of  their  grandeur  and 
sublimity, may form a creed of unbelief by assigning that necessary being, pre-eternity, 
and the attributes of Godhead to an unlimited number of beings, an infinity of atoms. 
Or like the foolish  

 

129

Sophists,  he  can  abdicate  his  intelligence  by  denying  and  negating  both  his  own 
existence and that of the universe. 

Thus,  all  the  truths of belief and Islam, basing their matters on the grandeur and 
sublimity  which  are  their  requirement,  deliver  themselves  from  the  awesome 
absurdities,  the  fearsome  superstitions,  and  the  tenebrous  ignorance  of  unbelief  that 
confront them, and take up their place in sound hearts and straight intellects, through 
utmost submission and assent. 

The constant proclamation of this grandeur and sublimity in the call to prayer, in 

the prayers themselves and in most of the rites of Islam, 

Allahu akbar, God is Most Great! 
God is Most Great! God is Most Great! 

the declaration of the Sacred Tradition that “Grandeur is My shield and Sublimity My 
cloak;”5  and  the  statement  of  the  Prophet  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him)  —  his 
most inspiring communing with God, in the eighty-sixth part of Jawshan al-Kabir:6 

O You other than Whose Kingdom no kingdom exists;  
O You Whose Praise cannot be counted by His slaves;  
O You Whose Glory cannot be described by His creatures;  
O You Whose Perfection lies beyond the range of all vision;  
O You Whose Attributes exceed the bounds of all understanding;  
O You Whose Grandeur is beyond the reach of all thought;  
O You Whose Qualities man cannot fittingly describe;   
O You Whose Decree His slaves cannot avert;  
O You Whose Signs are manifest in everything  
—Be You glorified; there is no god other than You—  
Protection, protection, deliver us from the Fire!  

— all these show that  grandeur and sublimity constitute a necessary veil. 

                                             

5 Muslim, Birr, 136; Abu Da’ud, Libas, 25; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 16; Musnad, ii, 248, 376, 414, 427, 

442; iv, 416; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, i, 272; vii, 473; al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, iii, 534. 

6 The famous supplication revealed to the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) which, consisting of the 

Divine Names, is related to possess many merits. [Tr.] 

 

130

The Supreme Sign 
The Observations of a Traveller Questioning 
the Universe Concerning His Maker 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
The  seven  heavens  and  the  earth  and  all  that  is  in  them  extol  and  glorify 
Him, and there is nothing but glorifies Him with praise, but you understand 
not their glorifying; indeed, He is Most Forebearing, Most Forgiving.7 

 [This Second Station, in addition to explaining the above sublime verse, sets 
out the proofs, arguments, and  meaning of the First Station, which has been 
skipped.] 

Since  this  sublime  verse,  like  many  other  Qur’anic  verses,  mentions  first  the 
heavens —that brilliant page proclaiming God’s unity, gazed on at all times and by all 
men with wonder and joy— in its pronouncement of the Creator of this cosmos, let us 
too begin with a mention of the heavens. 

Indeed,  every  voyager  who  comes  to  the  hospice  and  the  realm  of  this  world, 
opens his eyes and wonders who is the master of this fine hospice, which resembles a 
most  generous  banquet,  a  most  ingenious  exhibition,  a  most  impressive  camp  and 
training  ground,  a  most  amazing  and wondrous place of recreation, a most profound 
and wise place of instruction. He asks himself too who is the author of this great book, 
and  who  is  the  monarch  of  this  lofty  realm.  There  first  presents  itself  to  him  the 
beautiful  

                                             

7 Qur’an, 17:44. 

 

131

face  of  the  heavens,  inscribed  with  the  gilt  lettering  of  the  stars.  That  face  calls  him 
saying, “Look at me, and I shall guide you to what you seek.”  

He looks then and sees a manifestation of dominicality performing various tasks in 
the  heavens:  it  holds  aloft  in  the  heavens,  without  any  supporting  pillar,  hundreds of 
thousands  of  heavenly  bodies,  some  of  which  are  a  thousand  times  heavier  than  the 
earth  and  revolve  seventy  times  faster  than  a  cannon-ball;  it  causes  them  to  move  in 
harmony and swiftly without colliding with each other; it causes innumerable lamps to 
burn constantly, without the  use of any oil; it disposes of these great masses without 
any  disturbance  or  disorder;  it  sets  sun  and  moon  to  work  at  their  respective  tasks, 
without  those  great  bodies  ever  rebelling;  it  administers  within  infinite  space  —the 
magnitude  of  which  cannot  be  measured  in  figures  should  they  stretch  from  pole  to 
pole—  all  that  exists,  at  the  same  time,  with  the  same  strength,  in  the  same  fashion, 
manner and mould, without the least deficiency; it reduces to submissive obedience to 
its law all the aggressive powers inherent in those bodies; it cleanses and lustrates the 
face  of  the  heavens,  removing  all  the  sweepings  and  refuse  of  that  vast  assembly;  it 
causes  those bodies to manoeuvre like a disciplined army; and then, making the earth 
revolve,  it  shows  the  heavens  each  night  and  each  year  in  a  different  form,  like  a 
cinema screen displaying true and imaginative scenes to the audience of creation.  

There  is  within  this  dominical  activity  a  truth  consisting  of  subjugation, 
administration,  revolution,  ordering,  cleansing,  and  employment.  This  truth,  with  its 
grandeur and comprehensiveness, bears witness to the necessary existence and unity of 
the  Creator  of  the  Heavens  and  testifies  to  that  Existence  being  more  manifest  than 
that of the heavens. Hence it was said in the First Degree of the First Station: 

There is no god but God, the Necessary Being, to Whose Necessary Existence in 
Unity  the  heavens  and  all  they  contain  testify,  through  the  testimony  of  the 
sublimity  of  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  truth  of  subjugation,  administration, 
revolution, ordering, cleansing, and employment, a truth vast and perfect, and to 
be observed. 

Then that wondrous place of gathering known as space or the atmosphere begins 
thunderously to proclaim to that traveller come as a guest to the world, “Look at me! 
You can discover and find through me the object of your search, the one who sent you 
here!” The traveller looks at the sour but kind face of the atmosphere, and listening to 
the awesome but joyous thunderclaps perceives the following. 

The  clouds,  suspended  between  the  sky  and  the  earth,  water  the  garden  of  the 

world in the most wise and merciful fashion, furnish the inhabitants  

 

132

of the earth with the water of life, modify the natural heat of life, and hasten to bestow 
aid  wherever  it  is  needed.  In  addition  to  fulfilling  these  and  other  duties,  the  vast 
clouds,  capable  of  filling  the  heavens  sometimes  hide  themselves,  with  their  parts 
retiring to rest so that not a trace can be seen, just like a well-disciplined army showing 
and hiding itself in accordance with sudden orders. 

Then, the very instant the command is given to pour down rain, the clouds gather 
in one hour, or rather in a few minutes; they fill the sky and await further orders from 
their commander. 

Next  the  traveller  looks  at  the  wind  in  the  atmosphere  and  sees  that  the  air  is 
employed  wisely  and  generously  in  such  numerous  tasks  that  it  is  as  if  each  of  the 
inanimate  atoms  of  that  unconscious  air  were  hearing  and  noting  the  orders  coming 
from  that  monarch  of  the  universe;  without  neglecting  a  single  one  of  them,  it 
performs  them  in  ordered  fashion  and through the power of the monarch. Thereby it 
gives breath to all beings and conveys to all living things the heat, light, and electricty 
they need, and transmits sound, as well as aiding in the pollination of plants. 

The traveller then looks at the rain and sees that within those delicate, glistening 
sweet drops, sent from a hidden treasury of mercy, there are so many compassionate 
gifts  and  functions  contained  that  it  is  as  if  mercy  itself  were  assuming  shape  and 
flowing forth from the dominical treasury in the form of drops. It is for this reason that 
rain has been called “mercy.” 

Next  the  traveller  looks  at  the  lightning  and  listens  to  the  thunder  and  ses  that 

both of these, too, are employed in wondrous tasks. 

Then  taking  his  eyes  off  these,  he  looks  to  his  own  intellect  and  says:  “The 
inanimate, lifeless cloud that resembles carded cotton has of course no knowledge of 
us; when it comes to our aid, it is not because it takes pity on us. It cannot appear and 
disappear  without  receiving  orders.  Rather  it  acts  in  accordance with the orders of a 
most  powerful  and  compassionate  commander.  First  it  diasppears  without  leaving  a 
trace, then suddenly reappears in order to begin its work. By the command and power 
of  a  most  active  and  exalted,  a  most  magnificent  and  splendid,  monarch,  it  fills  and 
then empties the atmosphere. Inscribing the sky with wisdom and erasing the pattern, 
it makes of the sky a tablet of effacement and affirmation, a depiction of the gathering 
and  the  resurrection.  By  the  contriving  of  a  most  generous  and  bountiful,  a  most 
munificent  and solicitous sustainer, a ruler who regulates and disposes, it mounts the 
wind and taking with  it treasuries of rain each as heavy as a mountain, hastens to the 
aid of the needy. It is as if it were weeping over them in pity, with  

 

133

its tears causing the flowers to smile, tempering the heat of the sun, spraying gardens 
with water, and washing and cleansing the face of the earth.” 

That  wondering  traveller  then  tells  his  own  intellect:  “These  hundreds  of 
thousands of wise, merciful and ingenious tasks and acts of generosity and mercy that 
arise  from  the  veil  and  outer  form  of  this  inanimate,  lifeless,  unconscious,  volatile, 
unstable, stormy, unsettled, and inconstant air, clearly establish that this diligent wind, 
this tireless servant, never acts of itself, but rather in accordance with the orders of a 
most  powerful  and  knowing,  a  most  wise  and  generous  commander.  It  is  as  if  each 
particle were aware of every single task, like a soldier understanding and hearkening to 
every  order  of  its  commander,  for  it  hears  and  obeys  every  dominical  command  that 
courses through the air. It aids all animals to breathe and to live, all plants to pollinate 
and  grow,  and  cultivates  all  the  matter  necessary  for  their  survival.  It  directs  and 
administers  the  clouds,  makes  possible  the  voyaging  of  sailing  ships,  and  enables 
sounds  to  be  conveyed,  particularly  by  means  of  wireless,  telephone,  telegraph  and 
radio, as well as numerous other universal functions.  

“Now these atoms, each composed of two such simple materials as hydrogen and 
oxygen  and  each  resembling  the  other,  exist  in  hundreds  of  thousands  of  different 
fashions all over the globe; I conclude therefore that they are being employed and set 
to work in the utmost orderliness by a hand of wisdom. 

“As the verse makes clear, 

And  the  disposition  of  the  winds  and  the  clouds,  held  in  disciplined  order 
between the heavens and the earth,8 

the one who through the disposition of the winds employs them in countless dominical 
functions, who through the ordering of the clouds uses them in infinite tasks of mercy, 
and  who  creates  the  air  in  this  fashion  —  such  a  one  can  only  be  the  Possessor  of 
Necessary Existence, the One Empowered over All Things and Knowledgeable of All 
Things, the Sustainer endowed with Glory and Generosity.” This is the conclusion our 
traveller now draws. 

Then  he  looks  at  the  rain  and  sees  that  within  it  are  contained  benefits  as 
numerous as the raindrops, and dominical manifestations as multiple as the particles of 
rain,  and  instances  of  wisdom  as  plentiful  as  its  atoms.  Those  sweet,  delicate  and 
blessed  drops  are  moreover  created  in  so  beautiful  and  ordered  a  fashion,  that 
particularly the rain sent in the summertime, is despatched and caused to fall with such 
balance and regularity  

                                             

8 Qur’an, 2:164. 

 

134

that  not  even  stormy  winds  that  cause  large  objects  to  collide  can  destroy  its 
equilibrium  and  order;  the  drops  do  not  collide  with  each  other  or  merge  in  such 
fashion  as  to  become  harmful  masses  of  water.  Water,  composed  of  two  simple 
elements  like  hydrogen  and  oxygen,  is  employed  in  hundreds  of  thousands  of  other 
wise,  purposeful  tasks  and  arts,  particularly  in  animate  beings;  although  it  is  itself 
inanimate and unconscious. Rain which is then the very embodiment of Divine Mercy 
can only be manufactured in the unseen treasury of mercy of One Most Compassionate 
and Merciful, and on its descent expounds in physical form the verse:  

And  He  it  is  Who  sends  down  rain  after  men  have  despaired,  and  thus 
spreads out His Mercy.9 

The traveller next listens to the thunder and watches the lightning. He understands 
that these two wondrous events in the atmosphere are like a material demonstration of 
the verse, 

The thunder glorifies His praise,10 
The brilliance of His lightning almost robs them of their sight.11 

They also announce the coming of rain, and thus give glad tidings to the needy. 

Yes, this sudden utterance of a miraculous sound by the atmosphere; the filling of 
the  dark  sky  with  the  flash  and  fire  of  lightning;  the  setting  alight  of  the  clouds  that 
resemble  mountains  of  cotton  or  pipes  bursting  with  water  and  snow  —  these  and 
similar phenomena are like a blow struck on the head of the negligent man whose gaze 
is directed down at the earth. They tell him:  

“Lift up your head, look at the miraculous deeds of the most active and powerful 
being  who  wishes  to  make  himself  known.  In  the  same  way  that  you  are  not  left  to 
your own devices, so too, these phenomena and events have a master and a purpose. 
Each of them is caused to fulfil a particular task, and each is employed by a Most Wise 
Disposer.” 

The  wondering  traveller  hears  then  the  lofty  and  manifest  testimony  to  the  truth 
that  is  composed  of    the  disposition  of  the  winds,  the  descent  of  the  rains  and  the 
administration  of  the  events  of  the  atmosphere,  and  says:  “I  believe  in  God.”  That 
which was stated in the Second Degree of the First Station expresses the observations 
of the traveller concerning the atmosphere: 

                                             

9 Qur’an, 42:28. 
10 Qur’an, 13:13. 
11 Qur’an, 24:43. 

 

135

There is no god but God, the Necessary Being, to Whose Necessary Existence in 
Unity  the  atmosphere  and all  its  contains  testifies, through the testimony of the 
sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the truth of subjugation, disposal, causing 
to descend, and regulation, a truth vast and perfect, and to be observed. 

Next  the  globe  addresses  that  thoughtful  traveller,  now  growing  accustomed  to 

his reflective journey: 

“Why are you wandering through the heavens, through space and the sky? Come, 
I will make known to you what you are seeking. Look at the functions that I perform 
and read my pages!” He looks and sees that the globe, like an ecstatic Mevlevi dervish 
with  its  twofold  motion,  is  tracing  out  around  the  field  of  the  Supreme  Gathering  a 
circle  that  determines  the  succession  of  days,  years,  and  seasons.  It  is  a  most 
magnificent dominical ship, loaded with the hundreds of thousands of different forms 
of  food  and  equipment  needed  for  all  animate  beings,  floating  with  the  utmost 
equilibrium in the ocean of space and circling the sun. 

He  then  looks  at  the  pages  of  the  earth  and  sees  that  each  page  of  each  of  its 
chapters proclaims the Sustainer of the Earth in thousands of verses. Being unable to 
read the whole of it, he looks at the page dealing with the creation and deployment of 
animate beings in the spring, and observes the following: 

The forms of the countless members of hundreds of thousands of species emerge, 
in the utmost precision, from a simple material and are then nurtured in most merciful 
fashion. Then, in miraculous manner, wings are given to some of the seeds; they take 
to  flight  and  are  thus  dispersed.  They  are  most  effectively  distributed, most carefully 
fed and nurtured. Countless tasty and delicious forms of food, in the most merciful and 
tender  fashion,  are  brought  forth  from  dry  clay,  and  from  roots,  seeds  and  drops  of 
liquid  that  differ  little  among  each  other.  Every  spring,  a  hundred  thousand  kinds  of 
food  and  equipment  are  loaded  on  it  from  an  unseen  treasury,  as  if  onto  a  railway 
waggon,  and  are  despatched  in  utmost  orderliness to animate beings. The sending to 
infants of canned milk in those food packages, and pumps of sugared milk in the form 
of their mothers’ affectionate breasts, is in particular such an instance of solicitousness, 
mercy and wisdom that it immediately establishes itself as a most tender manifestation 
of the mercy and generosity of the Merciful and Compassionate One. 

In  short:  this  living  page  of  spring  displays  a  hundred  thousand  examples  and 

samples of the Supreme Gathering, and is a tangible demonstration of this verse, 

 

136

So look to the signs of God’s mercy: how He gives life to the earth after its 
death, for verily He it is Who gives life to the dead, and He has power over 
all things.12 

Moreover, this verse may be said to express in miraculous fashion the meanings of 
the page that is spring. The traveller thus understood that the earth proclaims through 
all its pages, in fashion proportionate to their size: “There is no god but He.”13 

In expression of the meaning beheld by the traveller through the brief testimony of 
one  of  the  twenty  aspects  of  a  single page out of the more  than twenty pages of the 
globe, it was said in the Third Degree of the First Station: 

There is no god but God, the Necessary Being, to Whose Necessary Existence in 
Unity the earth with all that is in it and upon it testifies, through the testimony of 
the  sublimity  of  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  truth  of  subjugation,  disposition, 
nurturing,  opening,  distribution  of  seeds,  protection,  administration,  the  giving 
of   life to  all  animate beings, compassion and mercy universal and general, a 
truth vast and perfect, and to be observed. 

Then  that  reflective  traveller  read each page of  the cosmos, and as he did so his 
faith,  that  key  to  felicity,  strengthened;  his  gnosis,  that  key  to  spiritual  progress, 
increased; his belief in God, the source and foundation of all perfection, developed one 
degree  more;  his  joy  and  pleasure  augmented  and  aroused  his  eagerness;  and  while 
listening to the perfect and convincing lessons given by the sky, by space and the earth, 
he  cried  out  for  more.  Then  he  heard  the  rapturous  invocation  of  God  made  by the 
tumult of the seas and the great rivers, and listened to their sad yet pleasant sounds. In 
numerous ways they were saying to him: “Look at us, read also our signs!” Looking, 
our traveller saw the following: 

The  seas,  constantly  and  vitally  surging,  merging  and  pouring  forth  with  an 
inclination  to  conquest  inherent  in  their  very  nature,  surrounded  the  earth,  and 
together with the earth, revolved, extremely swiftly, in a circle of twenty-five thousand 
years in a single year. Yet the seas did not disperse, did not overflow or encroach on 
the  land  contiguous  to  them. They  moved  and  stood still, and were protected by the 
command and power of a most powerful and magnificent being. 

Then looking to the depths of the sea, the traveller saw that apart from the most 

beautiful, well-adorned and symmetrical jewels, there were  

                                             

12 Qur’an, 30:50. 
13 A phrase repeated many times in the Qur’an. 

 

137

thousands  of  different  kinds  of  animal,  sustained  and  ordered,  brought  to  life  and 
caused to die, in so disciplined a fashion,  their provision coming from mere sand and 
salt  water,  that  it  established  irresistibly  the  existence  of  a  Powerful  and  Glorious,  a 
Merciful and Beauteous Being administering and giving life to them.  

The  traveller  then  looks  at  the  rivers and sees that the benefits inherent in them, 
the  functions  they  perform,  and  their  continual  replenishment,  are  inspired  by  such 
wisdom and mercy as indisputably to prove that  all rivers, springs, streams and great 
waterways flow forth from the treasury of mercy of the Compassionate One, the Lord 
of  Glory  and  Generosity.  They  are  preserved  and  dispensed,  indeed,  in  so 
extraordinary a fashion that it is said “Four rivers flow forth from Paradise.”14 That is, 
they  transcend  by  far  apparent  causes,  and  flow  forth  instead  from  the  treasury  of  a 
non-material  Paradise,  from  the  superabundance  of  an  unseen  and  inexhaustible 
source. 

For example, the blessed Nile, that turns the sandy land of Egypt into a paradise, 
flows from the Mountains of the Moon in the south without ever being exhausted, as if 
it  were  a  small  sea.  If  the  water  that  flowed  down  the  river  in  six  months  were 
gathered together in the form of a mountain and then frozen, it would be larger than 
those mountains. But the place in the mountains where the water is lodged and stored 
is  less  than  a  sixth  of  their  mass.  As  for  the water that replenishes the river, the rain 
that  enters the reservoir of the river is very sparse in that torrid region and is quickly 
swallowed up by the thirsty soil; hence it is incapable of maintaining the equilibrium of 
the  river.  A  tradition  has  thus  grown  up  that  the  blessed  Nile  springs,  in  miraculous 
fashion, from an unseen Paradise. This tradition has profound meaning and expresses a 
beautiful truth. 

The traveller saw, then, a thousandth part of the truths and affirmations contained 
in the oceans and rivers. The seas proclaim unanimously with a power proportionate to 
their extent, “There is no god but He,” and produce as witnesses to their testimony all 
the creatures that inhabit them. This, our traveller preceived. 

Expressing and conveying the testimony of the seas and the rivers, we said, in the 

Fourth Degree of the First Station: 

There  is  no  god  but  God,  the  Necessary  Existent,  to  the  necessity  of  Whose 
Existence  in  Unity  point  all  the  seas  and  the  rivers,  together  with  all  they 
contain,  by  the  testimony  of the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the  truth 
of  subjugation,  preservation,  storing  up,  and  administration,  vast  and  well-
ordered, and to be observed. 

                                             

14 See, Muslim, Janna, 26. (The rivers, Sayhan, Jayhan, Euphrates, and Nile). [Tr.] 

 

138

Then the traveller is summoned, on his meditative journey, by the mountains and 
the plains. “Read too our pages,” they say. Looking he sees that the universal function 
and duty of mountains is of such grandeur and wisdom as to stupefy the intelligence. 
The  mountains  emerge  from  the  earth  by  the  command  of  their  Sustainer,  thereby 
palliating the turmoil, anger, and rancour that arise from disturbances within the earth. 
As  the  mountains  surge  upward,  the  earth  begins  to  breathe;  it  is  delivered  from 
harmful tremors and upheavals, and its tranquillity as it pursues its duty of rotation is 
no  longer  disturbed.  In  the same way that masts are planted in ships to protect them 
from turbulence and preserve their balance, so too mountains are set up on the deck of 
the ship that is the earth, as masts and stores, as is indicated by verses of the Qur’an of 
Miraculous Exposition such as these: 
And the mountains as pegs,15 
And We have cast down anchors,16 
And the mountains He anchored them.17 

Then, too, there are stored up and preserved in the mountains all kinds of springs, 
waters,  minerals  and  other  materials  needed  by  animate  beings,  in  so  wise,  skilful, 
generous  and  foreseeing  a  fashion  that  they  prove  that  they  are  the  storehouses  and 
warehouses  and  servants  of  One  possessing  infinite  power,  One  possessing  infinite 
wisdom. Deducing from these two examples the other duties and instances of wisdom 
—as great as mountains— of the mountains and plains, the traveller sees through the 
general instances of wisdom in them and particularly in regard to the fashion in which 
all manner of things are stored up in them providentially, the testimony they give and 
the Divine unity they proclaim declaring “There is no god but He,” —a declaration as 
powerful and firm as the mountains and vast and expansive as the plains— and he too 
says, “I believe in God.” 

In expression of this meaning, it was said in the Fifth Degree of the First Station: 
There  is  no  god  but  God,  to  the  Necessity  of  Whose  Existence  point  all  the 
mountains  and  plains  together  with  what  is  in  them  and  upon  them,  by  the 
testimony of the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the truth of the storing up, 
administration,  dissemination  of  seed,  preservation,  and  regulation,  a  truth 
providential,  dominical,  vast,  general,  well-ordered,  and  perfect,  and  to  be 
observed. 

                                             

15 Qur’an, 78:7. 
16 Qur’an, 50:7. 
17 Qur’an, 79:32. 

 

139

Then,  while  that  traveller  was  travelling  in  his  mind  through  the  mountains  and 
plains,  the  gate  to  the arboreal  and  vegetable  realm  was  opened  before  him.  He  was 
summoned  inside:  “Come,”  they  said,  “Inspect  our  realm  and  read  our  incriptions.” 
Entering,  he  saw  that  a  splendid  and  well-adorned  assembly  for  the  proclamation  of 
God’s unity and a circle for the mentioning of His Names and the offering of thanks to 
Him, had been drawn up. He understood for the very appearance of all trees and plants 
that  their  different species were proclaiming unanimously, “There is no god but He.” 
For  he  perceived  three  great  and  general  truths  indicating  and  proving  that  all  fruit-
giving  trees  and  plants  with  the  tongue  of  their symmetrical and eloquent leaves, the 
phrases of their charming and loquacious flowers, the words of their well-ordered and 
well-spoken  fruits,  were  testifying  to  God’s  glory  and  bearing  witness  that “There is 
no god but He.” 

The  First:    In  the  same  way  that  in  each  of  the  plants  and  trees  a  deliberate 
bounty and generosity is to be seen in most obvious fashion, and a purposive liberality 
and munificence, so too it is to be seen in the totality of the trees and plants, with the 
brilliance of sunlight.  

The  Second:  The  wise  and  purposive  distinction  and  differentiation,  one  that 
cannot in any way be attributed to chance, the deliberate and merciful adornment and 
giving of form — all this is to be seen as clearly as daylight in the infinite varieties and 
species;  they  show  themselves  to  be  the  works  and  embroideries  of  an  All-Wise 
Maker. 

The Third: The opening and unfolding of all the separate members of the hundred 
thousand  species  of  that  infinite  realm,  each  in  its  own  distinct  fashion  and  shape,  in 
the utmost order, equilibrium and beauty, from well-defined, limited, simple and solid 
seeds  and  grains,  identical  to  each  other  or  nearly  so  —  their  emerging  from  those 
seeds  in  distinct  and  separate  form,  with  utter  equilibrium,  vitality  and  wise  purpose 
without the least error or mistake, is a truth more brilliant than the sun. The witnesses 
proving this truth are as numerous as the flowers, fruits and leaves that emerge in the 
spring. So the traveller said, “Praise be to God for the blessing of belief.” 

In expression of these truths and the testimony given to them, we said in the Sixth 

Degree of the First Station: 

There is no god but God, to the Necessity of Whose Existence in Unity points the 
consensus  of  all  the  species  of  trees  and  plants  that  are  engaged  in  glorifying 
God  and  speak  with  the  eloquent  and  well-ordered  words  of  their  leaves,  their 
loquacious and comely flowers, their well-ordered and well-spoken fruits, by the 
testimony of the  

 

140

sublimity  of  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  truth  of  bestowal,  bounty,  and 
generosity, done in purposive mercy, and the truth of differentiation, adornment, 
and decoration, done with will and wisdom. Definite, too, is the indication given 
by the truth of the opening of all their symmetrical, adorned, distinct, variegated 
and  infinite  forms,  from  seeds  and  grains  that  resemble  and  approximate  each 
other, that are finite and limited.  

As  this  traveller  through  the  cosmos  proceeded  on  his  meditative  journey,  with 
increased  eagerness  and  a  bouquet  of  gnosis  and  faith,  itself  like  a  spring,  gathered 
from  the  garden  of  the  spring,  there  opened  before  his  truth-perceiving  intellect,  his 
cognitive reason, the gate to the animal and bird realm. With hundreds of thousands of 
different voices and various tongues, he was invited to enter. Entering, he saw that all 
the animals and birds, in their different species, groups and nations, were proclaiming, 
silently and aloud, “There is no god but He,” and had thus turned the face of the earth 
into  a vast place of invocation, an expansive assembly for the proclamation of God’s 
glory.  He  saw each  of  them  to be like an ode dedicated to God, a word proclaiming 
His  glory,  a  letter  indicating  His  mercy,  each  of  them  describing  the  Maker  and 
offering  Him  thanks  and  encomium.  It  was  as  if  the  senses,  powers,  members  and 
instruments  of  those  animals  and  birds  were  orderly  and  balanced  words,  or  perfect 
and  disciplined  expressions.  He  observed  three  great  and  comprehensive  truths 
indicating,  in  decisive  form,  their  offering  of  thanks  to  the  Creator  and  Provider  and 
their testimony to His unity. 

The First: Their being brought into existence with wisdom and purpose and their 
creation  full  of  art  in  a  fashion  that  in  no  way  can  be  attributed  to  chance,  to  blind 
force  or  inanimate  nature;  their  being  created  and  composed  in  purposive  and 
knowledgeable  manner;  their  animation  and  being  given  life  in  a  way that displays in 
twenty  aspects  the  manifestation  of  knowledge,  wisdom,  and  will  —  all  of  this  is  a 
truth  that  bears  witness  to  the  Necessary  Existence  of  the  Eternally  Living  and  Self-
Subsistent,  His  seven  attributes  and  unity,  a  witness  repeated  to  the  number  of  all 
animate beings. 

The  Second:    There  appears  from  the  distinction  made  among  those  infinite 
beings  and  from  their  adornment  and  decoration  in  a  fashion  by  which  their  features 
are  different,  their  shapes  adorned,  their  proportions  measured  and  symmetrical,  and 
their forms well-ordered — there appears from this a  truth so vast and powerful that 
none  other  than  the  One  Powerful  over  all  things,  the  One  Knowledgeable  of  all 
things,  could  lay  claim  to  it,  this  comprehensive  act  which  displays  in  every  respect 
thou 

 

141

sands of wonders and instances of wisdom; it is impossible and precluded that anything 
other than such a one could lay claim to it. 

The  Third:  The  emergence  and  unfolding  of  those  countless  creatures,  in  their 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  different  shapes  and  forms,  each  of  which  is  a  miracle  of 
wisdom, their emergence from eggs and drops of water called sperm that are identical 
with each other or closely resemble each other, and are limited and finite in number, all 
this in the most orderly, symmetrical and unfailing fashion, is so brilliant a truth as to 
be illumined with proofs and evidences as numerous as the animals themselves. 

By  the  consensus  of  these  three  truths,  all  the  species  of  animals  are  engaged 
together in testifying that “There is no god but He.” It is as if the whole earth, like a 
great  man,  were  saying  “There  is  no  god  but  He”  in  a  manner  befitting  its  vastness, 
and conveying its testimony to the dwellers of the heaven. The traveller saw this and 
understood it perfectly. In expression of these truths, we said in the Seventh Degree of 
the First Station: 

There  is  no  god  but  God,  to  Whose  Necessary  Existence  in  Unity  points  the 
consensus of all animals and birds, that praise God and bear witness to Him with 
the  words  of  their  senses,  their  faculties  and  powers,  words  well-balanced, 
ordered and eloquent; with the words of their limbs and members, words perfect 
and persuasive; by the testimony of the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the 
truth of bringing into being, making, and creating, according to will, the truth of 
distinction and decoration according to purpose, and the truth of proportioning 
and  forming  according  to  wisdom.  Definite  too  is  the  indication  given  by  the 
truth of the opening of all of their orderly, distinct, variegated and infinite forms, 
out of identical or similar eggs and drops of sperm, that are finite and limited. 

That  meditative  voyager,  in  order  to  advance  farther  in  the  infinite  degrees  and 
countless  luminous  stages  of  knowledge  of  God,  then  wished  to  enter  the  world  of 
men,  the  realm  of  humanity.  Humanity,  headed  by  the  prophets,  invited  him,  and  he 
accepted the invitation. Looking first at the stopping-place of the past, he saw that all 
of the prophets (Peace and blessings be upon him), the most luminous and perfect of 
human  kind,  were  reciting  in  chorus,  “No  god  but  He,”  and  making remembrance of 
God.  With  the  power  of  their  brilliant,  well-attested  and  innumerable  miracles,  they 
were  proclaiming  God’s  unity,  and in order to advance man from the animal state to 
angelic  degree,  they  were  instructing  men  and  summoning  them  to  belief  in  God. 
Kneeling down in that school of light, he too paid heed to the lesson. 

 

142

He saw that in the hand of each of those teachers, the most exalted and renowned 
of  all  celebrated  human  beings,  there  were  numerous  miracles, bestowed on them by 
the Creator of All Being as a sign confirming their mission. Further, a large group of 
men, a whole community, had confirmed their claims and come to belief at their hands; 
a  truth  assented  to  and  confirmed  by  these  hundreds  of  thousands  of  serious  and 
veracious  individuals,  unanimously  and  in  full  agreement,  was  bound  to  be  firm  and 
definitive.  He  understood,  too,  that  the  people  of  misguidance,  in  denying  a  truth 
attested  and  affirmed  by  so  many  veracious  witnesses,  were  committing  a  most 
grievous  error,  indeed  crime,  and  were  therefore  deserving  of  a  most  grievous 
punishment. He recognized, by contrast, those who assented to the truth and believed 
in it, as being the most true and righteous, and a further degree of the sanctity of belief 
became apparent to him. 

Yes, the infinite miracles bestowed by God on the prophets (Peace be upon them) 
each  one  being  like a confirmation of their mission; the heavenly blows dealt to their 
opponents,  each  being  like  a  proof  of  their  truthfulness;  their  individual  perfections, 
each one being like an indication of their righteousness; their veracious teachings; the 
strength  of  their  faith,  a  witness  to  their  honesty;  their  supreme  seriousness  and 
readiness  to  self-sacrifice;  the  sacred  books  and  pages  held  by  their  hands;  their 
countless  pupils  who  through  following  their  paths  attain  truth,  perfection  and  light, 
thus  proving  again  the  truthfulness of  the teachings; the  unanimous agreement of the 
prophets    —those  most  earnest warners— and their followers in all positive matters; 
their concord, mutual support and affinity — all of this constitutes so powerful a proof 
that no power on earth can confront it, and no doubt or hesitation can survive it. 

Our traveller understood further that inclusion of belief in all the prophets (Peace 
be upon them) among the pillars of belief, represents another great source of strength. 
Thus  he  derived  great  benefit  of  faith  from  their  lessons,  in  expression  of  which  we 
said in the Eighth Degree of the First Station: 

There is no god but God, to the Necessity of Whose Existence in Unity points the 
unanimity of all the prophets, through the power of their luminous miracles, that 
both affirm and are affirmed. 

That  questing  traveller,  having  derived  a  lofty  taste  of  truth  from  the  power  of 
belief,  found  himself  invited,  while coming from  the assembly of the prophets (Peace 
be  upon  them)  to  the  classroom  of  those  profound,  original,  exacting  scholars  who 
affirm  the  claims  of  the  prophets  (Peace  be  upon  them)  with  the  most  decisive  and 
powerful proofs and who are known as the purified and most veracious ones. 

 

143

Entering  their  classroom,  he  saw  thousands  of  geniuses  and  hundreds  of 
thousands of exact and exalted scholars proving all the affirmative matters connected 
with  faith,  headed  by  the  necessity  of  God’s  existence  and  His  unity,  with  such 
profound demonstrations as to leave not the least room for doubt. Indeed, the fact that 
they  are  agreed  in  the  principles  and  pillars  of  belief,  despite  their  differences  in 
capacity and outlook, and that each of them relies on a firm and certitudinous proof, is 
in itself such evidence that it can be doubted only if it is possible for a similar number 
of intelligent and perspicuous men to arrive at a single result. Otherwise the only way 
for  the denier to oppose them is to display his ignorance —his utter ignorance— and 
his  obstinacy  with  respect  to  negative  matters  that  admit  neither  of  denial  nor 
affirmation. He will in effect be closing his eyes but the one who closes his eyes is able 
to turn day into night only for himself. 

The traveller learned that the lights emitted in this vast and magnificent classroom 
by  these  respected  and  profound  scholars  had  been  illumining  half  of  the  globe  for 
more than a thousand years. He found in it moral and spiritual force that the combined 
strength  of  all  the  people  of  denial  would  be  unable  to  shake  or  destroy.  In  brief 
allusion  to  the  lesson  learned  by  the  traveller  in  this  classroom  we  said  in  the  Ninth 
Degree of the First Station: 

There  is  no  god  but  God,  to  Whose  Necessary  Existence  in  Unity  points  the 
agreement  of  all  of  the  purified  scholars,  with  the  power  of  their  resplendent, 
certain and unanimous proofs. 

Our  contemplative  traveller  came  forth  from  the  classroom,  ardently  desiring  to 
see the lights that are to be observed in the continuous strengthening and development 
of faith, and in advancing from the degree of the knowledge of certainty to that of the 
vision  of  certainty.  He  then  found  himself  summoned  by  thousands  or  millions  of 
spiritual guides who were striving toward the truth and attaining the vision of certainty 
in the shade of the highway of Muhammad (PBUH) and the ascension of Muhammad 
(PBUH). This they were doing in a meeting-place, a hospice, a place of remembrance 
and  preceptorship,  that  was  abundantly  luminous  and  vast  as  a  plain,  being  formed 
from  the merging of  countless small hospices and convents. Upon entering, he found 
that  those  spiritual  guides  —people  of  unveiling  and  wondrous  deeds—  were 
unanimously  proclaiming,  “No  god  but  He,”  on  the  basis  of  their  witnessing  and 
unveiling  of  the  Unseen  and  the  wondrous  deeds  they  had  been  enabled  to  perform; 
they  were  proclaiming  the  necessary  existence  and  unity  of  God.  The  traveller 
observed how manifest and clear must be a truth to which unanimously subscribe these 
sacred geniuses and luminous  

 

144

gnostics. For, like the sun is known through the seven colours in its light, the saints’ 
luminous colours, their light-filled hues, their true paths and right ways and veracious 
courses are manifested from the light of the Pre-Eternal Sun through seventy colours, 
indeed, through colours to the number  of the Divine Names, and are all different. He 
saw that the unanimity of the prophets and the agreement of the purified scholars and 
accord  of  the  saints  forms  a  supreme  consensus,  more  brilliant than the daylight that 
demonstrates the existence of the sun. 

In brief allusion to  the benefit  derived by our traveller from the Sufi hospice, we 

said in the Tenth Degree of the First Station: 

There  is  no  god  but  God,  to  Whose  Necessary  Existence  in  Unity  points  the 
unanimity  of  the saints  in  their  manifest,  well-affirmed  and  attested  divinations 
of the truth and wondrous deeds. 

Now our traveller through the world, aware that the most important and greatest 
of  all human perfections, indeed the very source and origin of  all such perfections, is 
the love of God that arises from belief in God and the knowledge of God, wished with 
all  of  his  powers,  outer  and  inner,  to  advance  still  farther  in  the  strengthening of  his 
faith and the development of his knowledge. He therefore raised his head and gazing at 
the heavens said to himself: 

“The most precious thing in the universe is life; all things are made subordinate to 
life. The most precious of all living beings is the animate, and the most precious of the 
animate  is  the  conscious.  Each  century  and  each  year,  the  globe  is  engaged  in 
emptying  and  refilling  itself,  in  order  to  augment  this  most  precious  substance.  It 
follows,  then,  without  doubt,  that  the  magnificent  and  ornate  heavens  must  have 
appropriate people and inhabitants, possessing life, spirit and consciousness, for events 
relating  to  seeing  and  speaking  with  the  angels  —such  as  the  appearance  of  Gabriel 
(Peace be upon him) in the presence of Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) 
and in the view of the Companions— have been transmitted and related from the most 
ancient times. Would, then, that I could converse with the inhabitants of the heavens, 
and learn their thoughts on this matter. For their words concerning the Creator of the 
cosmos are the most important.”  

As  he  was  thus  thinking  to  himself,  he  suddenly  heard a heavenly voice: “If you 
wish to meet us  and  hearken to our lesson, then know that before all others we have 
believed in the articles of faith brought by means of us to the prophets, headed by the 
Prophet  Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him),  who  brought  the  Qur’an  of 
Miraculous Exposition. 

 

145

“Then  too  all  of  the  pure  spirits  from  among  us  that  have  appeared  before  men 
have, unanimously and without exception, born witness to the necessary existence, the 
unity, and the sacred attributes of the Creator of this cosmos, and proclaimed this with 
one accord. The affinity and mutual correspondence of these countless proclamations 
is  a  guide  for  you  as bright as the sun.” Thus the traveller’s light  of faith shone, and 
rose from the earth to the heavens. 

In brief allusion to the lesson learned by the traveller from the angels,  we said in 

the Eleventh Degree of the First Station: 

There  is  no  god  but  God,  to  Whose  Necessary  Existence  in  Unity  points  the 
unanimity  of  the  angels  that  appear  to human gaze, and who speak to the elect 
among men, with their mutually corresponding and conforming messages. 

Then,  that  ardent  and  inquisitive  traveller,  having  learned  from  the  tongues  of 
various  realms  of  creation  in  the  Manifest  Realm  in  their  material  and  corporeal 
aspects, and from the utterance of their modes of being, desired to study and journey 
through the World of the Unseen and the Intermediate Realm, and thus to investigate 
reality. There opened to him the gate of upright and luminous intellects, of sound and 
illumined  hearts,  that  are  like  the  seed  of  man,  who  is  the  fruit  of  the  universe,  and 
despite their slight girth can expand virtually to embrace the whole of the cosmos. 

He  looked  and  saw  a series of  human isthmuses linking the realm of the Unseen 
with  that  of  the  Manifest,  and  the  contacts  between  those  two  realms  and  the 
interchanges  between  them  insofar  as  they  affect  man,  taking  place  at  those  points.  
Addressing his intellect and his heart he said: 

“Come, the path leading to truth from these counterparts of yours is shorter. We 
should benefit by studying their qualities, natures and colours concerning faith that we 
find  here,  not  by  listening  to  the  lessons  given  by  the  tongues  of  disposition  as  was 
previously the case.” 

Beginning  his  study,  he  saw  that  the  belief  and  firm  conviction  concerning  the 
Divine unity that all luminous intellects possessed, despite their varying capacities and 
differing, even opposing, methods and outlooks, was the same, and that their steadfast 
and confident certainty and assurance was one. They had, therefore, to be relying on a 
single,  unchanging  truth; their  roots  were  sunk  in  a  profound  truth  and could not be 
plucked  out.  Their  unanimity  concerning  faith,  the  necessary  existence  and  unity  of 
God, was an unbreakable and luminous chain, a brightly lit window opening onto the 
world of the truth. 

He saw also that the unanimous, assured and sublime unveilings and  

 

146

witnessings of the pillars of belief enjoyed by all those sound and luminous intellects, 
whose  methods  were  various  and  outlooks  divergent,  corresponded  to  and  agreed 
with  each  other  on  the  matter  of  the  Divine  unity.  All  those  luminous  hearts,  turned 
and joined to the truth and manifesting it, each a small throne of dominical knowledge, 
a comprehensive mirror of God’s Eternal Besoughtedness, were like so many windows 
opened  onto  the  Sun  of the Truth. Taken together, they were  like a supreme mirror, 
like  an  ocean  reflecting  the  sun.  Their  agreement  and  unanimity  concerning  the 
necessary existence and unity of God was an unfailing and reliable most perfect guide, 
most elevated preceptor. For it is in no way possible or conceivable that a supposition 
other  than  the  truth,  an  untrue  thought,  a  false  attribute,  should  so  consistently  and 
decisively be able to deceive simultaneously so many sharp eyes, or to induce illusion 
in  them.  Not  even  the  foolish  Sophists,  who  deny  the  cosmos,  would  agree with the 
corrupt and dissipated intellect that held such a thing possible. All of this our traveller 
understood, and he said, together with his own intellect and heart, “I have believed in 
God.” 

In brief allusion to the benefit derived from upright intellects and luminous hearts 
by  our  traveller,  for  knowledge  of  belief,  we  said  in  the  Twelfth  and  Thirteenth 
Degrees of the First Station: 

There  is  no  god  but  God,  to  Whose  Necessary  Existence  in  Unity  points  the 
consensus  of  all  upright  intellects,  illumined  with  congruent  beliefs  and 
corresponding  convictions  and  certainties,  despite  differences  in  capacity  and 
outlook. There also points to His Necessary Existence in Unity the agreement of 
all  sound,  luminous  hearts,  with  their  mutually  corresponding  unveilings  and 
their congruent witnessings, despite differences in method and manner. 

Then that traveller looking closely at the World of the Unseen, and voyaging in it 
with  his  intellect  and  his  heart,  knocked  inquisitively  on  the  door  of  that  world, 
thinking  to  himself,  “What  does  this  world  have  to say?”  The  following  occurred  to 
him: it is to be clearly understood that behind the veil of the Unseen is one who wants 
to make himself known through all these numerous finely adorned artefacts full of art 
in  this  corporeal  Manifest  World,  and  to  make  himself  loved  through  these  infinite 
sweet  and  decorated  bounties,  and  to  make  known  his  hidden  perfections  through 
these innumerable miraculous and skilful works of art, and who does this by act rather 
than  speech  and  by  making  himself  known by the tongue of disposition. Since this is 
so, of a certainty he will speak and make himself known and loved through speech and 
utterance  just  as  he  does  through  deed  and  state.  In  which  case,  from  his 
manifestations we must know him in respect to the World of the Unseen. Whereupon 
he  

 

147

entered that world with his heart and saw the following with the eye of his intellect: 

The  truth  of  revelations prevails at all instants over all parts of the World of the 
Unseen, with a most powerful manifestation. There comes with the truths of revelation 
and  inspiration  proceeding  from  the  One  All-Knowing  of  the Unseen, a testimony to 
His existence and unity far stronger than testimony of the universe and created beings. 
He  does not leave Himself, His existence and His unity,  only to the testimony of His 
creatures. Rather, He speaks with a pre-eternal Speech consonant with His own being. 
The  Speech  of  the  One  Who  is  all-present  and  all-seeing  everywhere  with  His 
Knowledge  and  Power  is  also  endless,  and  just  as the meaning of His Speech makes 
Him known, so does His discourse make Himself known together with His attributes. 

The  traveller  recognized  that  the  truth,  reality,  and  existence  of  revelation  has 
been  made  plain  to  the  point  of  being  self-evident  by  the  consensus  of  one  hundred 
thousand prophets (Peace be upon them), by the agreement among their proclamations 
concerning  the  manifestion  of  Divine  revelation;  by  the  evidences  and  miracles 
contained in the sacred books and heavenly pages, which are the guides and exemplars 
of the overwhelming majority of humanity, confirmed and assented to by them, and are 
the  visible  fruits  of  revelation.  He  understood  further  that  the  truth  of  revelation 
proclaims five sacred truths. 

The  First:  To  speak  in  accordance  with  men’s  intellects  and  understandings, 
known as ‘Divine condescension to the minds of men,’ is a form of Divine descent. It 
is  a  requirement  of  God’s dominicality that He endows all of his conscious creatures 
with speech, understands their speech, and then participates in it with His own speech. 
The  Second:  The  One  Who,  in  order  to  make  Himself  known,  fills  the  cosmos 
with  His  miraculous  creations  and  endows  them  with  tongues  speaking  of  His 
perfections, will necessarily make Himself known with His own words also. 

The  Third:  It  is  a  function  of  His  being  Creator  to  respond  in  words  to  the 
supplications and offerings of thanks that are made by the most select, the most needy, 
the most delicate and the most ardent among His beings — true men. 

The  Fourth:  The  attribute  of  Speech,  an  essential  concomitant  and  luminous 
manifestation  of  both  Knowledge  and  Life,  will  necessarily  be  found  in  a 
comprehensive and eternal form in the being Whose Knowledge is comprehensive and 
Whose Life is eternal. 

The Fifth:  It is a consequence of Divinity that the Being Who endows  

 

148

men  with  impotence  and  desire,  poverty  and  need,  anxiety  for  the  future,  love  and 
worship,  should communicate His own existence, by way of His speech, to His  most 
loved  and  lovable,  His  most  anxious  and  needy  creatures,  who  are  most  desirous  of 
finding their Lord and Master. 

The  evidences  for  the  existence  in  unity  of  the  Necessary  Existent  offered  in 
unanimity  by  universal  and  heavenly  revelations,  which  contain  the  truths  of  Divine 
descent,  dominical  self-proclamation,  compassionate  response,  Divine  conversation, 
and  eternal  self-communication,  constitute a proof more powerful than the testimony 
for the existence of the sun brought by the rays of sunlight. 

Our  traveller  understood  this  then looked  in  the direction of inspiration and saw 
that  veracious inspiration indeed resembles revelation in some respects and is a mode 
of dominical speech. There are, however, two differences: 

THE FIRST: Revelation, which is much higher than inspiration, generally comes 

by the medium of the angels, whereas inspiration generally comes directly. 

So  too  a  king  has  two modes of speech  and  command. The first consists of his 
sending  to  a  governor  a  lieutenant  equipped  with  all  the  pomp  of  monarchy  and the 
splendour  of  sovereignty.  Sometimes,  in  order  to  demonstrate  the  splendour  of  his 
sovereignty  and  the  importance of his command, he may meet with the intermediary, 
and then the decree will be issued. 

The second consists of his speaking privately in his own person, not with the title 
of  monarch  or  in  the  name  of  kingship,  concerning  some  private  matter,  some  petty 
affair,  using  for  this  purpose  a  trusted  servant,  some  ordinary  subject,  or  his  private 
telephone. 

In the same way the Pre-Eternal Monarch may either, in the name of the Sustainer 
of All the Worlds, and with the title of Creator of the Universe, speak with revelation 
or  the  comprehensive inspiration that performs the function of revelation, or He may 
speak  in  a  different  and  private  fashion,  as  the  Sustainer  and  Creator  of  all  animate 
beings, from behind the veil, in a way suited to the recipient. 

THE  SECOND  DIFFERENCE:  Revelation  is  without  shadow,  pure,  and 
reserved for the elect. Inspiration, by contrast, has shadow, colours intermingle with it, 
and  it  is  general.  There  are  numerous  different  kinds  of  inspiration,  such  as  the 
inspiration of angels, the inspiration of men, and the inspiration of animals; inspiration 
thus  forms  a  field  for  the  multiplication  of  God’s  words,  that  are  as  numeous  as the 
drops  in  the  ocean.  Our  traveller  understood  that  this  matter  is,  indeed,  a  kind  of 
commentary on  

 

the verse, 

149

Were  the  sea  to  become  ink  for  the  words  of  my  Sustainer,  verily  the  sea 
would be exhausted before the words of my Sustainer.18 

Then  he  looked  at  the  nature,  the  wisdom,  and  the  testimony  of  inspiration  and 

saw that its nature, wisdom and result were composed of four lights. 

The  first:  it  is  the  result  of  God’s  Lovingness  and  Mercifulness  that  He  makes 
himself loved through word, presence  and discourse, in the same way that He makes 
Himself loved to His creatures through His deeds. 

The second: it is a requirement of His Compassionateness that just as He answers 
His servants’ prayers in deed, He should also answer them in word, from behind veils. 
The third: it is a concomitant of dominicality that just as He responds in deed to 
the  cries  for  help,  supplications,  and  pleadings  of  those  of  His  creatures  who  are 
afflicted  with  grievous  misfortunes  and  hardships,  so  too  He  should  hasten  to  their 
help with words of inspiration, which are like a form of speech. 

The  fourth:  God  makes  His  existence,  presence  and  protection  perceptible  in 
deed  to  His  most  weak  and  indigent,  His  most  poor  and needy, conscious creatures, 
that stand in great need of finding their Master, Protector, Guardian, and Disposer. It 
is  a  necessary  and  essential  consequence  of  His  Divine  solicitousness  and  His 
dominical compassion that He should also communicate His presence and existence by 
speech,  from  behind  the  veil  of  veracious  inspiration  —a  mode  of  dominical 
discourse— to individuals, in a manner peculiar to them and their capacities, through 
the telephone of their hearts. 

He  then  looked  to  the  testimony  of  inspiration  and  saw  that  if  the  sun,  for 
example,  had  consciousness  and  life,  and  if  the  seven  colours  of  sunlight  were  the 
seven  attributes,  in that respect it would have a form of speech through the rays and 
manifestations  found  in  its  light.  And  in  this  situation  both  its  similitudes  and 
reflections  would  be  present  in  all  transparent  objects,  and  it  would  speak  with  all 
mirrors and shining objects and fragments of glass and bubbles and droplets of water, 
indeed with all transparent particles, in accordance with the capacity of each; it would 
respond to the needs of each, and all these would testify to the sun’s existence; and no 
task  would  form  an  obstacle  to  any  other  task,  and  no  speaking  obstruct  any  other 
speaking. This is self-evident. 

                                             

18 Qur’an,18:109. 

 

150

In  the same way, the Speech of the Glorious Monarch of Pre-Eternity and Post-
Eternity, the Beauteous and Exalted Creator of All Beings, Who may be described as 
the  Pre-Eternal  Sun,  manifests  itself  to  all  things,  in  general  and  comprehensive 
fashion,  in  a  manner  appropriate  to  their  capacity,  as  do  also  His  Knowledge  and 
Power. No request interferes with another, no task prevents the fulfilment of another, 
and no address becomes confused with another. All of this our traveller understood as 
self-evident.  He  knew  that  all  of  those  manifestations,  those  discourses,  those 
inspirations,  separately  and  together,  evidenced  and  bore  witness  unanimously  to the 
presence,  the  necessary  existence,  the  unity  and  the  oneness  of  that  Pre-Eternal  Sun 
with a knowlege of certainty that approached a vision of certainty. 

In brief allusion to the lesson in knowledge of God from the World of the Unseen 
gained by our inquisitive traveller, we said in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Degrees of 
the First Station: 

There is no god but God, the Necessary Existent,  the One, the Single, to Whose 
Necessary  Existence  in  Unity  points  the  consensus  of  all  true  revelations, 
containing  Divine  descent,  glorious  discourse,  dominical  self-revelation, 
compassionate response to the invocations of men, and eternal indications of His 
existence to his creatures. There points also to His Necessary Existence in Unity 
the  agreement  of  all  veracious  inspirations,  containing  expressions  of  God’s 
love,  compassionate  responses  to  the  prayers  of  God’s  creatures,  dominical 
responses to the appeals of His servants for aid, and glorious intimations of His 
existence to His creatures. 

Then that traveller through the world addressed his own intellect saying: “Since I 
am seeking my Master and Creator by means of the creatures of the cosmos, I ought 
before all else to visit the most celebrated of all these creatures, the greatest and most 
accomplished  commander  among  them,  according  to  the  testimony  even  of  his 
enemies, the most renowned ruler, the most exalted in speech and the most brilliant an 
intellect,  who  has  illuminated  fourteen  centuries  with  his  excellence  and  with  his 
Qur’an,  Muhammad  the  Arabian  Prophet  (May  God’s  peace  and  blessings  be  upon 
him).” In order thus to visit him and seek from him the answer to his quest, he entered 
the blessed age of the Prophet in his mind, and saw that age to be one of true felicity, 
thanks  to  that  being.  For  through  the  light  he  had  brought,  he  had  turned  the  most 
primitive and illiterate of peoples into the masters and teachers of the world.  

He said too to his own intellect, “Before asking him concerning our Creator, we 

should first learn that value of this extraordinary being, the  

 

151

veracity  of  his  words  and  the  truthfulness  of  his  warnings.”  Thus  he  began 
investigating,  and  of  the  numerous  conclusive  proofs  that  he  found  we  will  briefly 
indicate here only nine of the most general ones. 

THE  FIRST:  All excellent qualities and characteristics were to be found in that 
extraordinary  being,  according  to  the  testimony  even  of  his  enemies.  Hundreds  of 
miracles  were  made  manifest  at  his  hands,  according  to  explicit  Qur’anic  verses  or 
traditions enjoying the status of tawatur.19 Examples of these miracles are his splitting 
of the moon, And the moon split,20 with a single indication of his finger; his casting of 
a handful of dust into the eyes of his enemies, causing them to flee, It was not your act 
when you threw, but God’s,21 and his giving his thirsting army to drink from the water 
that flowed forth from his five fingers like the Spring of Kawthar. Since some of those 
miracles, numbering more than three hundred, have been set forth with decisive proofs 
in  the  remarkable  and  wondrous  work  known  as  The  Miracles  of  Muhammad  (The 
Nineteenth  Letter),  we  leave  discussion  of  the  miracles  to  that  work,  and  permit  the 
traveller to continue speaking: 

“A  being  who  in  addition  to  noble  characteristics  and  perfections  has  all  these 
luminous miracles to demonstrate, must certainly be the most truthful in speech of all 
men. It is inconceivable that he would stoop to trickery, lies and error, the deeds of the 
vile.” 

THE  SECOND:  He  holds  in  his  hand  a  decree  from  the  lord of the universe, a 
decree  accepted  and  affirmed  in  each  century  by  more  than  three  hundred  million 
people.  This  decree,  the  Qur’an  of  Mighty  Stature,  is  wondrous  in  seven  different 
ways. The fact that the Qur’an has forty different aspects of miraculousness and that it 
is the word of the Creator of all beings has been set forth in detail with strong proofs 
in  the  Twenty-Fifth  Word,  The  Miraculousness  of  the  Qur’an,  a  celebrated  treatise 
that  is like the sun of the Risale-i Nur. We therefore leave such matters to that work 
and listen to the traveller as he says,“There can never be any possibility of lying on the 
part of the being who is the conveyor and proclaimer of this decree, for that would be 
a violation of the decree and treachery toward the One Who issued it.” 

THE  THIRD:  Such  a  Sacred  Law,  an  Islam,  a  code  of  worship,  a  cause,  a 
summons, and a faith did that being bring forth that the like of them does not exist, nor 
could it exist. Nor does a more perfect form of them  

                                             

19 Tawatur is the kind of report transmitted by numerous authorities, about which there is no 

room for doubt. [Tr.] 
20 Qur’an, 54:1. 
21 Qur’an, 8:17. 

 

152

exist, nor could it exist. For the Law appearing with that unlettered being has no rival 
in  its  administration  of  one  fifth  of  humanity  for  fourteen  centuries,  in  a  just  and 
precise  manner  through  its  numerous  injuctions.  Moreover  the  Islam  that  emerged 
from the deeds, sayings, and inward states of that unlettered being has no peer, nor can 
it  have,  for  in  each  century  it  has  been  for  three  hundred  million  men  a  guide  and  a 
refuge,  the  teacher  and  educator  of  their intellects and the illuminator  and  purifier of 
their hearts, the cause for the refinement and training of their souls, and the source of 
progress and advancement of their spirits. 

The Prophet  is similarly unparalleled in the way in which he was the foremost in 
practising all the forms of worship found in his religion, and the first in piety and the 
fear  of  God;  in  his  observing  the  duties  of  worship  fully  and  with  attention  to  their 
profoundest  dimensions,  even  while  engaged  in  constant  struggle  and  activity;  in  his 
practice of worship combining in perfect fashion the beginning and end of worship and 
servitude to God without imitation of anyone. 

With  the  Jawshan  al-Kabir,  from  among  his  thousands  of  supplicatory  prayers 
and  invocations,  he  describes  his  Sustainer  with  such  a  degree  of  gnosis  that  all  the 
gnostics and saints who have come after him have been unable, with their joint efforts, 
to attain a similar degree of gnosis and accurate description. This shows that in prayer 
too he is without peer.  Whoever looks at the section at the beginning of the Treatise 
On  Supplicatory  Prayer  which  sets  forth  some  part  of  the  meaning  of  one  of  the 
ninety-nine  sections  of  the  Jawshan  al-Kabir  will  say  that  the  Jawshan  too  has  no 
peer. 

In his conveying of the message and his summoning men to the truth, he displayed 
such steadfastness, firmness and courage that although great states and religions, and 
even  his  own  people,  tribe  and  uncle  opposed  him  in  the  most  hostile  fashion,  he 
exhibited  not  the  slightest  trace  of  hesitation  anxiety  or  fear.  The  fact  that  he 
successfully  challenged  the  whole  world  and  made  Islam  the  master  of  the  world 
likewise proves that there is not and cannot be anyone like him in his conveying of the 
message and summons. 

In  his  faith,  he  had  so  extraordinary  a  strength,  so  marvellous  a  certainty,  so 
miraculous  a  breadth,  and  so  exalted  a  conviction,  illumining  the  whole  world,  that 
none of the ideas and beliefs then dominating the world, and none of the philosophies 
of the sages and teachings of the religious leaders, was able, despite extreme hostility 
and  denial,  to  induce  in  his  certainty,  conviction,  trust  and  assurance,  the  slightest 
doubt, hesitation, weakness or anxiety. Moreover, the saintly of all ages, headed by  

 

153

the Companions, the foremost in the degrees of belief, have all  drawn on his fountain 
of belief and regarded him as representing the highest degree of faith. This proves that 
his  faith  too  is  matchless.  Our  traveller  therefore  concluded,  and  affirmed  with  his 
intellect,  that  lying  and  duplicity  have  no  place  in  the  one  who  has  brought  such  a 
unique sacred law, such an unparalleled Islam, such a wondrous devotion to worship, 
such an extra-ordinary excellence in supplicatory prayer, such a universally acclaimed 
summons to the truth and such a miraculous faith. 

THE FOURTH: In the same way that the consensus of the prophets is a strong 
proof  for  the  existence  and  unity  of  God,  so  too  it  is  a  firm  testimony  to  the 
truthfulness  and  messengerhood  of  this  being.  For  all  the  sacred  attributes,  miracles 
and functions that indicate the truthfulness and messengerhood of the prophets (Peace 
be  upon  them)  existed  in  full  measure  in  that  being  according  to  the  testimony  of 
history. The prophets have verbally predicted the coming of that being and given good 
tidings thereof in the Torah, the Gospels, the Psalms, and the pages; more than twenty 
of the most conclusive examples of these glad tidings, drawn from the scriptures, have 
been set forth and proven in the Nineteenth Letter. Similarly, through all the deeds and 
miracles  associated  with  their  prophethood  they  have  affirmed  and,  as  it  were,  put 
their signature to the mission of that being which is the foremost and most perfect in 
the tasks and functions of prophethood. Just as through verbal consensus they indicate 
the  Divine  unity,  through  the  unanimity  of  their  deeds  they  bear  witness  to  the 
truthfulness of that being. This too was understood by our traveller. 

THE FIFTH: Similarly, the thousands of saints who have attained truth, reality, 
perfection,  wondrous  deeds,  unveiling  and  witnessing  through  the  instruction  of  this 
being and following him, bear unanimous witness not only to the Divine unity but also 
to the truthfulness and messengerhood of this being. Again, the fact that they witness, 
through the light of sainthood, some of the truths he proclaimed concerning the World 
of the Unseen, and that they believe in and affirm all of those truths through the light 
of  belief,  either  with  knowledge  of  certainty,  or  with  the  vision  of  certainty,  or  with 
absolute  certainty.  He  saw  that  this  too  demonstates  like  the  sun  the  degree  of 
truthfulness and rectitude of that great being, their master. 

THE  SIXTH:  The  millions  of  purified,  sincere,  and  punctilious  scholars  and 
faithful  sages,  who  have  reached  the  highest  station  of  learning  through  the  teaching 
and  instruction  contained  in  the  sacred  truths  brought  by  that  being,  despite  his 
unlettered  nature,  the  exalted  sciences  he  invented  and  Divine  knowledge  he 
discovered — they not only prove  

 

154

and  affirm,  unanimously  and  with  the  strongest  proofs,  the  Divine unity  which is the 
foundation of his mission, but also bear unanimous witness to the truthfulness of this 
supreme teacher and great master, and to the veracity of his words. This is a proof as 
clear as daylight. The Risale-i Nur too with its one hundred parts is but a single proof 
of his truthfulness. 

THE SEVENTH: The Family and Companions of the Prophet —who with their 
insight,  knowledge,  and  spiritual  accomplishment  are  the  most  renowned,  the  most 
respected, the most celebrated, the most pious and the most keensighted of men after 
the  prophets—  examined  and  scrutinized,  with  the  utmost  attention,  seriousness  and 
exactitude,  all  the  states,  thoughts  and  conditions  of  this  being,  whether  hidden  or 
open. They came to the unanimous conclusion that he was the most truthful, exalted, 
and honest being in the world, and this, their unshakeable affirmation and firm belief, is 
a proof like the daylight attesting the reality of the sun. 

THE  EIGHTH:  The  cosmos indicates  its  Maker,  Inscriber,  and  Designer,  Who 
creates,  administers,  and  arranges  it,  and  through  determining  its  measure  and  form 
and regulating it, has disposal over it as though it was a palace, a book, an exhibition, 
a spectacle. And so too it indicates that it requires and necessitates an elevated herald, 
a  truthful  unveiler,  a  learned master, and a truthful teacher who will know and make 
known the Divine purposes in the universe’s creation, teach the dominical instances of 
wisdom in its changes and transformations, give instruction in the results of its dutiful 
motions,  proclaim  its  essential  value  and  the  perfections  of  the  beings  within  it,  and 
express the meanings of that mighty book; it indicates that he is certain to exist. Thus, 
the  traveller  knew  that  it  testified  to  the  truthfulness  of  this  being,  who  performed 
these functions better than  anyone, and to his being a most elevated and loyal official 
of the universe’s Creator. 

THE  NINTH:  There  is  behind  the  veil  One  Who  wishes  to  demonstrate  with 
these ingenious and wise artefacts the perfection of His talent and art; to make Himself 
known  and  loved  by  means  of  these  countless  adorned  and  decorated  creations;  to 
evoke  praise  and  thanks  through  the  unnumbered  pleasurable  and  valuable  bounties 
that  he bestows; to cause men to worship Him with gratitude and appreciation in the 
face of His dominicality, through His solicitous and protective sustenance of life, and 
His provision of nurture and bounty in such manner as to satisfy the most delicate of 
tastes  and  appetites;  to  manifest  His  Divinity  through  the  change  of  seasons,  the 
alternation  of  night  and  day,  and  through  all  His  magnificent  and  majestic  deeds,  all 
His awe-inspiring and wise acts and creativity, and thereby to cause men to believe in 
his Divinity, in submission, humility and obedience; and to demonstrate His justice and 
truthful 

 

155

ness by at all times protecting virtue and the virtuous and destroying evil and the evil, 
by  annihilating  with  blows  from  heaven  the  oppressor  and  the  liar.  There  will  of  a 
certainty  be  at  the  side  of  this  Unseen  Being  His  most  beloved  creature  and  most 
devoted  bondsman,  who,  serving  the  purposes  that  have  just  been  mentioned, 
discovers and unravels the talisman and riddle of the creation of the universe, who acts 
always  in  the  name  of  that  Creator,  who  seeks  aid  and  success  from  Him,  and  who 
receives  them  from  Him  —  Muhammad  of  Quraysh  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon 
him!) 

The  traveller  further  said,  addressing  his  own  intellect:  “Since  these  nine  truths 
bear  witness  to  the  truthfulness  of  this  being,  he  must  be  the  source  of  glory  of 
mankind and the source of honour for the world. If we therefore call him the Pride of 
the World and Glory of the Sons of Adam, it will be fitting. The fact that the awesome 
sovereignty  of  that  decree  of  the  Compassionate  One,  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous 
Exposition  that  he holds in his hand, has conquered half the world, together with his 
individual  perfections  and  exalted  virtues,  shows  that  he  is  the  most  important 
personage  in  the  world.  The  most  important  word  concerning  our  Creator  is  that 
which he utters.” 

Now see: the foundation of the summons of this extraordinary being and the aim 
of all his life, based on the strength furnished by his hundreds of decisive and evident 
and  manifest  miracles,  and  the  thousands  of  exalted,  fundamental  truths  contained  in 
his religion, was to prove and bear witness to the existence of the Necessary Existent, 
His  Unity,  attributes  and  Names,  to  affirm,  proclaim  and  announce  Him.  He  is 
therefore  like  a sun in the cosmos, the  most brilliant proof of our Creator, this being 
whom  we  call  the  Beloved  of  God.  There  are  three  forms  of  great  and  infallible 
consensus  each  of  which  affirms,  confirms,  and  puts  its  signature  to  the  witness  he 
bears. 

The First: the unanimous affirmation made by that luminous assembly known and 
celebrated throughout the world as the Family of Muhammad (Peace and blessings be 
upon  him)  including  thousands  of  poles  and  supreme  saints  of  penetrating  gaze  and 
ability to perceive the Unseen, such as Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him), who 
said, “Were the veil to be lifted, my certainty would not increase,” and ‘Abd al-Qadir 
al-Gilani, the Ghawth al-A‘zam (May his mystery be sanctified), who saw the Supreme 
Throne and the awesome form of Israfil while yet on the earth. 

The  Second:  the  confirmation  made  with  a  strong  faith  that  permitted  men  to 
sacrifice  their  lives  and  their  property,  their  fathers  and  tribes,  by  the  renowned 
assembly known as the Companions, who found themselves among a primitive people 
and in an unlettered environment, devoid  

 

156

of all social life and political thought, without any scripture and lost in the darkness of 
a  period  between  prophets;  and  who  in  a  very  brief  time  came  to  be  the  masters, 
guides,  and  just  rulers  of  the  most  civilized  and  politically  and  socially  advanced 
peoples  and  states,  and  to  rule  the  world  from  east  to  west  in  universally  approved 
fashion. 

The Third: the confirmation provided with unanimous and certain knowledge by 
that  lofty group of punctilious and profound scholars of whom in each age thousands 
spring forth, who advance in wondrous fashion in every science and work in different 
fields. 

Thus, the testimony brought by this being to the Divine unity is not particular and 
individual, but general and universal and unshakeable. If all the demons that exist were 
to unite, they could not challenge it. Such was the conclusion reached by the traveller. 
In reference to the lesson learned in the School of Light by that traveller from the 
world, that wayfarer in life, when he visited in his mind the blessed age of the Prophet, 
we said at the end of the Sixteenth Degree of the First Station: 

There  is  no  god  but  God,  the  Necessary  Existent,  the  One,  the  Unique,  the 
Necessity of Whose Existence in Unity is indicated by the Pride of the World and 
the  Glory  of  the  Sons  of  Adam,  through  the  majesty  of  the  sovereignty  of  his 
Qur’an,  the  splendour  of  the  expanse  of  his  religion,  the  multiplicity  of  his 
perfections, and the exaltedness of his characterisitics, as confirmed even by the 
testimony of his enemies. He bears witness and brings proof through the strength 
of  his  hundreds  of  manifest  and  evident  miracles,  that  both  testify  to  truth  and 
are  themselves  the  object  of  true  testimony;  and  through  the  strength  of  the 
thousands of luminous and conclusive truths contained in his religion, according 
to  the  consensus  of  all  the  possessors  of  light,  the  agreement  of  his  illumined 
Companions, and the unanimity of the scholars of his community, the possessors 
of proofs and luminous insight. 

The tireless and insatiable traveller, who knew the aim of life in this world and the 
essence of life to be faith, addressed his own heart and said: “Let us examine the book 
known  as  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition,  which  is  said  to  be  the  word  and 
utterance of the Being Whom we are seeking, the most famous, the most brilliant and 
wisest  book  in  the  world,  that  issues  a  challenge  in  every  age  to  whoever  refuses  to 
submit to it. Let us see what it says. But first, we must establish that this book is from 
our Creator,” and he began to search. 

Since  the  traveller  lived  in  the  present  age,  he  looked  first  at  the  Risale-i  Nur, 

flashes from the miraculousness of the Qur’an; he saw its  

 

157

one  hundred and  thirty  parts  to consist  of  luminous  points  drawn  from  that Book of 
Discernment,  or  well-founded  explanations  of  its  contents.  Even  though  the  Risale-i 
Nur  is  valiantly  struggling  to  diffuse  the  truths  of  the  Qur’an in all directions, in this 
obstinate  and  atheistic  age,  no  one  can  defeat  it,  which  proves  that  its  master,  its 
source, its authority and its sun, is the Qur’an, heavenly not human speech. Among the 
hundreds of proofs in the different parts of the Risale-i Nur, the single proof contained 
in  the  Twenty-Fifth  Word  and  the  end  of  the  Nineteenth  Letter,  establishes  forty 
aspects  of  the  Qur’an’s  miraculousness  in such  a  way that  whoever  sees  it, far  from 
uttering  any  criticism  or  objection,  admires  its  arguments,  and  utters  appreciative 
praise. The traveller left it to  the Risale-i Nur to prove that the Qur’an is miraculous 
and the true Word  of God, turning only to a brief indication of a few points showing 
its greatness. 

F i r s t  P o i n t : Just as the Qur’an, with all its miracles and truths indicating its 
veracity  is  a  miracle  of  Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him)  so  too, 
Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him)  with  all  his  miracles,  proofs  of 
prophethood and perfections of knowledge, is a miracle of the Qur’an and a decisive 
proof of the Qur’an’s being the Word of God. 

S e c o n d  P o i n t : The Qur’an, in this world, brought about in so luminous, 
felicitous and truthful a fashion, a revolution in the social life of man, as well as in the 
souls, hearts, spirits, and intellects of men, in their individual, social, and political lives, 
and  having  caused  this  revolution  perpetuated  it  in  such  a  fashion,  that  for  fourteen 
centuries at every moment its six thousand, six hundred and sixty-six verses have been 
read by the tongues of more than a hundred million men, training them, refining their 
souls  and  purifying  their  hearts.  To  spirits,  it  has  been  a  means  of  development  and 
advancement;  to  intellects,  an  orientation  and  light;  to  life,  it  has  been  life  itself  and 
felicity.  Such  a  book  is  of  a  certainty  unparalleled;  it  is  a  wonder,  a  marvel,  and  a 
miracle. 

T  h  i  r  d    P  o  i  n  t  :  The  Qur’an,  from  that  age  down  to  the  present,  has 
demonstrated  such  eloquence  that  it caused the value attached to the odes known as 
“Seven  Hanging  Poems”  that  were  written  in  gold  on  the  walls  of  the  Ka‘ba  to 
descend  to  such  a  point  that  the  daughter  of  Labid,  when  taking  down  her  father’s 
poem from the Ka‘ba, said, “Compared with the verses of the Qur’an, this no longer 
has any value.” 

A bedouin poet heard this verse being recited, 

Therefore expound openly what you are commanded,22 

                                             

22 Qur’an, 15:94. 

 

158

and immediately prostrated. They asked him: “Have you become a Muslim?” “No,” he 
replied, “I was prostrating before the eloquence of this verse.” 

Thousands  of  scholars  and  litterateurs,  like  geniuses  of  the  science  of  rhetoric 
such  as  ‘Abd  al-Qahir  Jurjani,  Sakkaki,  and  Zamakhshari,  have  unanimously  decided 
that the eloquence of the Qur’an is beyond human capacity and is unattainable. 

The  Qur’an  has  also  from  that  time  forward  invited  to  the  field  of  combat  all 
arrogant  and  egoistic  litterateurs  and  rhetoricians,  and  said  to  them  in  a  manner 
calculated to break their arrogance: “Come, produce a single sura like it, or else accept 
perdition  and  humiliation  in  this  world  and the hereafter.” Despite this challenge,  the 
obstinate rhetoricians of that age abandoned the short path of producing a single sura 
like the Qur’an, and instead chose the long path of casting their persons and property 
into danger. This proves that the short path cannot be taken. 

Millions of Arabic books are in circulation, some written by friends of the Qur’an 
in order to resemble and imitate it, others written by its enemies in order to confront 
and criticize it. Not one of them has been able to attain the level of the Qur’an. Should 
a common man even listen to them, he is sure to say: “The Qur’an does not resemble 
these other books, nor is it in the same class as they. It must be either below them or 
above them.” No one —no unbeliever or fool— in the world can say that it is below 
them. Hence its degree of eloquence is above all of them. Once a man read the verse, 
All that is in the heavens and the earth extols and glorifies God.23 

He said: “I cannot see any miraculous eloquence in this verse.” He was told: “Go back 
to that age like the traveller, and listen to the verse as recited there.” Imagining himself 
to be there before the revelation of the Qur’an, he saw that all the beings in the world 
were living in an unstable, transient world in  empty, infinite and unbounded space, in 
confusion and darkness, lifeless and without consciousness and purpose. Suddenly he 
heard this verse proclaimed by the tongue of the Qur’an and the verse removed a veil 
from  in  front  of  the  universe  and  illumined  the  face  of  the  globe;  this  pre-eternal 
speech,  this  eternal  decree,  gave  instruction  to  all  conscious  beings,  drawn  up  in the 
ranks  of  succeeding  centuries,  in  such  fashion  that  the  cosmos  became  like  a  vast 
mosque.  All  of  creation  headed  by  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  was  engaged  in  vital 
remembrance  of  God  and  proclamation  of  His  glory,  was  joyously  and  contentedly 
fulfilling its function.  

                                             

23 Qur’an, 57:1. 

 

159

All of this our traveller observed. Thus tasting the degree of the eloquence of the 
Qur’an,  and  comparing  the  other  verses  to  it  by  analogy,  he  understood  one  of  the 
many  thousands  of  wise  reasons  for  the  conquest  of  half  the  globe  and  a  fifth  of 
humanity by the eloquent murmuring of the Qur’an, for the uninterrupted continuance 
of its respected and magnificent monarchy for fourteen centuries. 

F o u r t h  P o i n t : The Qur’an has demonstrated such a veracious sweetness 
that  whereas  the  repetition  of  even  the  sweetest  thing  induces  disgust,  it  has  from 
earliest  times  been  accepted  by  everyone  and  even  become  proverbial  that  repeated 
recitation of the Qur’an, far from inducing disgust and weariness in men of sound heart 
and pure taste, on the contrary increases its sweetness. 

The Qur’an demonstrates, moreover, such a freshness, youth and originality, that 
even  though  it  has  lived  for  fourteen  centuries  and  passed  through  many  hands,  it 
retains its freshness as if it had only just been revealed. Every century sees the Qur’an 
enjoying  a  new  youth,  as  if  it  were  addressing  that  century  in  particular.  Similarly, 
scholars of every branch of learning, even though they keep the Qur’an  constantly at 
their side in order to benefit from it, and perpetually follow its method of exposition, 
see that the Qur’an maintains the originality of its style and manner of explanation. 

F i f t h  P o i n t : One wing of the Qur’an is in the past, and one is in the future, 
and  like  its  root  and  one  wing  are  the  agreed  truths  of  the  former  prophets,  and  it 
confirms and corroborates them, and they too confirm it with the tongue of unanimity, 
so  too  all  the  true  Sufi  paths  and  ways  of  sainthood  whose  fruits  like  the  saints  and 
purified  scholars,  who receive life from the Qur’an, show through their vital spiritual 
progress  that  their  blessed  tree  is  living,  effulgent,  and  the  means  to  truth,  and  who 
grow and live under the protection of its second wing, testify that the Qur’an is pure 
truth and the assembly of truths and in its comprehensiveness, a matchless wonder. 

S  i  x  t  h    P  o  i  n  t  :  The  Qur’an’s  truthfulness  and  veracity  show  that  its  six 
aspects are luminous. Indeed, the pillars of argument and proof beneath it; the flashes 
of  the  stamp  of  miraculousness  above  it;  the  gifts  of  happiness  in  this  world  and the 
next before it, its goal; the truths of heavenly revelation, the point of support behind it; 
the  assent  and  evidence  of  innumerable  upright  minds  to  its  right;  and  the  true 
tranquillity,  sincere  attraction,  and  submission  of  sound  hearts  and  clean  consciences 
on its left all prove that the Qur’an is a wondrous, firm, unassailable citadel of both the 
heavens and the earth.   

 

160

So  too  from  these  six levels, the Disposer of the universe has  set His seal on its 
being sheer truth and right, and not being man’s word, and its containing no error — 
the  Disposer,  Who  has  made  it His practice to always exhibit beauty in the universe, 
protect  good  and  right,  and  eliminate  imposters  and  liars,  has  confirmed  and  set  His 
seal on the Qur’an by giving it the most acceptable, highest, and most dominant place 
of respect and degree of success in the world.   

And so too the one who is the source of Islam and interpreter of the Qur’an — his 
believing in it and holding it in greater respect than everyone else, and being in a sleep-
like  state  when  it  was  revealed,24  and  other  words  and  speeches  not  resembling  or 
coming near it, and that Interpreter’s describing without hesistation and with complete 
confidence through the Qur’an true cosmic events of generally the past and the future 
from  behind  the  veil  of  the  Unseen,  and  no  trickery  or  fault  being  observed  in  him 
while being under the gazes of the sharpest eyes, and his believing and affirming every 
pronouncement of the Qur’an with all his strength and nothing shaking him, is a stamp 
confirming  that  the  Qur’an  is  revealed  and  true  and  the  blessed  Word  of  his  own 
Compassionate Creator. 

Also a fifth of mankind, indeed the greater part of it, being drawn to the Qur’an 
and  bound  to  it  in  religion  and  giving  ear  to  it  eagerly  desirous  of  the  truth,  and 
according to the testimony of many indications and events and illuminations, the jinn, 
angels,  and  spirit  beings  also  gathering  around  it  in  truth-worshipping  fashion  like 
moths  whenever  it  is  recited25  is  a  stamp  confirming  the  Qur’an’s  acceptance  by  all 
beings and that it occupies a most high position. 

Also,  all  the  classes  of  mankind  from  the  most  stupid  and lowly to the cleverest 
and  most  learned  taking  their  full  share  of  the  Qur’an’s  instruction  and  their 
understanding  its  most  profound  truths,  and  all  branches  of  scholars  like  the  great 
interpreters of the Greater Shari‘a in particular, and hundreds of Islamic sciences and 
branches  of  knowledge,  and  the  brilliant  and  exacting  scholars  of  theology  and  the 
principles  of  religion  extracting  from  the  Qur’an  all  the  needs  and  answers  for  their 
own  sciences  is  a  stamp  confirming  that  the  Qur’an  is  a  source  of  truth  and  mine of 
reality. 

Also, although the Arab literary figures, who were the most advanced in regard to 
literature, —those of them who were not Muslims— had the greatest need to dispute 
the Qur’an, their avoiding producing the like of  

                                             

24 Muslim, iv, nos: 1816, 1817; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 392; Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih, 

No: 4844. 

25 Bukhari, vi, 234; al-Mustadrak, i, 553, 554. 

 

161

only  a  single  sura  and  its  eloquence,  eloquence  being  only  one  aspect  of  the  seven 
major  aspects  of  the  Qur’an’s  miraculousness,  as  well  as  the  famous  orators  and 
brilliant scholars up to the present who have wanted to gain fame through disputing it 
being unable to oppose a single aspect of its miraculousness and their remaining silent 
in  impotence,  is  a  stamp  confirming  that  the  Qur’an  is  a  miracle  and  beyond  the 
powers of man.   

Yes,  the  value,  superiority,  and  eloquence  of  a  speech  or  word  is  apparent 
through knowing, “from whom it has come and to whom, and for what purpose;” the 
Qur’an  then  can  have  no  like,  and none can reach it. For the Qur’an is a speech and 
address  of  the  Sustainer  of  all  the  worlds  and  Creator  of  the  whole  universe  and  a 
dialogue in no way hinting of imitation and artificiality. It is addressed to the one sent 
in  the  name  of  all  men,  indeed  of  all  beings,  the  most  famous  and  renowned  of 
mankind, the strength and breadth of whose belief gave rise to mighty Islam and raised 
its owner to the level of the “Distance of Two Bow-strings” and returned him as the 
addressee  of  the  Eternally  Besought  One.  It  describes  and  explains  the  matters 
concerning  happiness  in  this  world  and  the  next,  the  results  of  the  creation  of  the 
universe, and the dominical purposes within it. It expounds also the belief of the one it 
addresses, which was the highest and most extensive of belief and bore all the truths of 
Islam.  It  turns  and  shows  every  side  of  the  huge  universe  like  a  map,  a  clock,  or  a 
house, and teaches and describes it in the manner of the Craftsman Who made them — 
to produce the like of this Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition is not possible; the degree 
of its miraculousness cannot be attained to. 

Also,  thousands  of  precise  and  learned  scholars  of  high  intelligence  have  each 
written  commentaries  expounding  the  Qur’an,  some  of  which  are  of  thirty,  forty,  or 
even  seventy  volumes,  showing  and  proving  through  evidence  and  argument  the 
innumerable  qualities,  fine  points,  characteristics,  mysteries,  elevated  meanings,  and 
numerous indications concerning every sort of hidden and unseen matter in the Qur’an. 
And the one hundred and thirty parts of the Risale-i Nur in particular, each of which 
proves with decisive arguments one quality, one fine point of the Qur’an. Each part of 
it — like The Miraculousness of the Qur’an, and the Second Station of the Twentieth 
Word,  which  deduces  many  things  from  the  Qur’an  concerning  the  wonders  of 
civilization  like  the  railway  and  the  aeroplane,  and  the  First  Ray,  called  Signs  of  the 
Qur’an, which makes known the indications of verses alluding to the Risale-i Nur and 
electricity,  and  the  eight  short  treatises  called  The  Eight  Symbols,  which  show  how 
well-ordered,  full  of  meaning,  and  mysterious  are  the  words  of  the  Qur’an,  and  the 
small treatise proving in five aspects the miraculousness of the verses  

 

162

at the end of Sura al-Fath in regard to their giving news of the Unseen — each part of 
the  Risale-i  Nur  shows  one  truth,  one  light  of  the  Qur’an.  All  this  forms  a  stamp 
confirming  that  the  Qur’an  has  no  like,  is  a  miracle  and  a  marvel,  and  that  it  is  the 
tongue of the World of the Unseen in the Manifest World and the Word of One All-
Knowing of the Unseen. 

Thus,  due  to  these  qualities  and  characteristics  of  the  Qur’an  indicated  above  in 
six  points,  six  aspects,  and  six  levels,  its  sublime,  luminous  sovereignty  and  sacred, 
mighty rule has continued with perfect splendour illuminating the faces of the centuries 
and the face of the earth for one thousand three hundred years. And also on account of 
these  qualities  of  the  Qur’an,  each  of  its  letters  has  gained  the  sacred  distinction  of 
yielding at least ten rewards, ten merits, and ten eternal fruits, and the letters of certain 
verses and suras yielding a hundred or a thousand fruits, or even more, and at blessed 
times  the  light,  reward,  and  value  of  each  letter  rising  from  ten  to  hundreds.  The 
traveller through the world understood this and said to his heart:  

“The Qur’an, which is thus miraculous in every respect, through the consensus of 
its  suras,  the  agreement  of  its  verses,  the  accord  of  its  lights  and  mysteries,  and the 
concurrence of its fruits and works, so testifies with its evidences in the form of proofs 
to the existence, unity, attributes, and Names of a Single Necessarily Existent One that 
it is from its testimony that the endless testimony of all the believers has issued forth.” 
Thus, in brief allusion to the instruction in belief and Divine unity that the traveller 

received from the Qur’an, it was said in the Seventeeth Degree of the First Station: 

There  is  no  god  but  God,  the  One  and  Unique  Necessary  Existent,  to  Whose 
Necessary  Existence  in  Unity  points  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition,  the 
book  accepted  and  desired  by  all  species  of  angel,  men  and  jinn,  whose  verses 
are  read  each  minute  of  the  year,  with  the  utmost  reverence,  by  hundreds  of 
millions of men, whose sacred sovereignty over the regions of the earth and the 
universe  and  the  face  of  time  is  permanent,  whose  spiritual  and  luminous 
authority  has  run  over  half  the  earth  and  a  fifth  of  humanity,  for  more  than 
fourteen centuries, with the utmost splendour. Testimony and proof is also given 
by the unanimity of its sacred and heavenly suras, the agreement of its luminous, 
divine  verses,  the  congruence  of  its  mysteries  and lights, the correspondence of 
its fruits and effects, by witnessing and clear vision. 

Our traveller, our voyager through life, knew now that faith is the most precious 
capital man can have, for it bestows on indigent man not some transient and ephemeral 
field or dwelling, but a palace, indeed an eternal  

 

163

kingdom  as  vast  as  the  whole  cosmos  or  the  world  itself.  Faith  also  bestows  on 
ephemeral  man  all  he  will  need  for  life  eternal;  delivers  from  eternal  annihilation 
wretched  man  who  waits  on the gallows for the arrival of fate; and opens to man an 
eternal treasury of everlasting felicity. The traveller then said to himself: 

“Onward!  In  order  to  gain  a  further  degree  from  among  the  infinite  degrees  of 
faith, let us refer to the totality of the cosmos, and listen to what it says. We will then 
be able to perfect and illumine the lessons we have received from its components and 
parts.” 

Looking  through  the  broad  and  comprehensive  telescope  he  had  taken  from  the 
Qur’an,  he  saw  the  cosmos to be so meaningful  and  well-ordered that it took on  the 
shape  of  an  embodied  book  of  the  Glorious  One,  an  incarnate  dominical  Qur’an,  a 
finely  adorned  palace  of  the  Eternally  Besought  One,  an  orderly  city  of  the  Most 
Merciful.  All the suras, verses, and words of that book of the universe, even its very 
letters,  chapters,  divisions,  pages,  and  lines,  through  their  constant  meaningful 
effacement  and  reaffirmation,  their  wise  changes  and  alternations,  gave  unanimous 
expression to the existence and presence of One Who has Knowledge of all things and 
Power over all things as the author of the book, of a Glorious Inscriber and a Perfect 
Scribe seeing all things in all things and knowing the relationship of all things with all 
things.  

So too all the species and particles of the cosmos, all its inhabitants and contents, 
all that enters it and leaves it, all the providential changes and the wise processses of 
rejuvenation that occur in it — these proclaim in unison the existence and unity of an 
exalted craftsman, a peerless Maker Who sets to work with limitless power and infinite 
wisdom. The testimony of two great and vast truths, of a piece with the immensity of 
the cosmos, affirms this supreme witness of the cosmos. 

FIRST  TRUTH:  These  are  the  truths  of  ‘createdness’  and  ‘contingency’ 
established with countless proofs by the gifted scholars of the principles of religion and 
the science of theology, as well as the sages of Islam. They said that since change and 
mutation are to be observed in the world and all things, the world must be ephemeral 
and created; it cannot be uncreated. If it is created, then there must be a Maker who 
created it. And if there  is no cause to be found in the essence of a thing either for its 
being or for its non-being, so that these two are equally possible, that thing cannot be 
necessary and eternal. 

It has further been proven with decisive arguments that it is not possible for things 
to create each other, since that would involve the absurd and false notion of causality 
and never-ending causal sequences. Hence  

 

164

the  existence  of  a  Necessary  Existence  becomes  necessary,  whose  like  cannot  exist, 
whose similitude is impossible, all other than whom is contingent and created by him. 

Yes,  the  truth  of  createdness has permeated the whole of the cosmos, and many 
instances  of it are visible to the eye; the rest can be seen only by the intellect. For in 
front of our eyes a whole world dies every autumn, and together with it die hundreds 
of  thousands  of  different  kinds  of  plants  and  small  animals,  each  member  of  each 
species  being  like  a  small  cosmos  unto  himself.  It  is,  however,  so  orderly  and 
disciplined a death that all things leave behind in their places seeds and eggs that in the 
spring  shall  be  the  means of resurrection and rebirth, miracles of mercy and wisdom, 
miracles  of  power  and  knowledge.  They  hand  to  the  seeds  and  eggs  their  book  of 
deeds and plan of action, entrusting them to the wisdom of the Glorious Preserver and 
under His protection, and only then do they die. 

In  spring,  the  dead  trees,  roots  and  animals  come  to  life  again  exactly  as  they 
were, thus providing hundreds of thousands of examples, specimens and proofs of the 
supreme  resurrection.  In  the  place  of  others,  plants  and  animals  resembling  them 
exactly are brought into being and life, thus publishing the pages of the beings of the 
preceding  spring,  together  with  their  deeds  and  functions,  just  like  an advertisement. 
Thus they demonstrate one meaning of the verse, 
When the pages are spread out.26 

Then  also,  with  respect  to  the  whole,  each  autumn  a  great  world  dies, and each 
spring a fresh world comes into being. That death and creation proceed in so orderly a 
manner, and so many separate deaths and creations occur within them, in such orderly 
and  regular  fashion,  that  it  is  as  if  the  world  were  a  traveller’s  lodge  where  animate 
beings reside for a time, where travelling worlds and migrant realms come, fulfil their 
duties, and then go on their way. So there is apparent to all intellects, with the clarity 
of the sun, the necessary existence, infinite power and unending wisdom of a Glorious 
Being  Who  creates  and  brings  into  being  in  this  world  vital  realms  and  purposive 
universes,  with  perfect wisdom, knowledge, and equilibrium, with balance, order and 
regularity,  and  Who  then  employs  them  for  dominical  purposes,  Divine  aims  and 
Merciful goals, with full power and compassion. We leave to the Risale-i Nur and the 
books of the theologians the further discussion of matters related to createdness.  

As for contingence, it prevails over and surrounds all of the cosmos. For we see 

that all things, universal or particular, big or small, from  

                                             

26 Qur’an, 81:10. 

 

165

God’s  Throne  down  to  the  ground,  from  the  atom  to  the  planet,  all  are  sent  to  the 
world  with  a  particular  essence,  a  specific  form,  a  distinct  identity,  particular 
attributes,  wise  qualities,  and  beneficial  organs.  Now  to  bestow  on  that  particular 
essence  and  quiddity its  peculiarities, from amongst the infinite possibilities  available; 
to  clothe  it  in  its  specific,  distinctive  and  appropriate  form,  from  among  the 
possibilities and probabilities that are as numerous as the forms that may be conceived; 
to distinguish  that being with the identity suited to it, from among the possibilities as 
numerous  as  the  other  members  of  its  species;  to  endow  with  special,  suitable  and 
beneficial  attributes  the  created  object  that  is  formless  and  hesitant  midst  the 
possibilities  and  probabilities  that  are  as  numerous  as  the  varieties  of  attribute  and 
degree;  to  affix  to  that  aimless  creature,  perplexed  and  distraught  amidst  the 
innumerable possibilities and probabilities that result from the infinitude of conceivable 
paths  and  modalities  —to  affix  to  it  wise  qualities  and  beneficial  organs and equip it 
with them— all of these are indications, proofs, and affirmations to the number of the 
innumerable  possibilities  of  the  necessary  existence,  infinite  power  and  unlimited 
wisdom  of  the  Necessary  Existent Who  creates,  chooses,  specifies,  and  distinguishes 
the  quiddity  and  identity,  the  form  and  shape,  the  attribute  and  situation  of  all 
contingent beings, whether they be universals or particulars.  

They indicate, too, that no object and no matter is hidden from Him, that nothing 
is difficult for Him, that the greatest task is as easy for Him as the smallest, that He can 
create a spring as easily as a tree, and a tree as easily as a seed. All this, then, pertains 
to  the  truth  of  contingence,  and  forms  one  wing  of the great testimony borne by the 
cosmos. 

Since  the  testimony  of  the  cosmos,  with  its  two  wings  and  two  truths,  is  fully 
established  and  explained  in  various  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  particularly  the 
Twenty-Second and Thirty-Second Words, as well as the Twentieth and Thirty-Third 
Letters, we refer our readers to those writings, and cut short an extremely long story. 

SECOND TRUTH: As for the Second Truth that proceeds from the total scheme 
of the cosmos, which is also the second wing of its great and universal testimony, it is 
as follows: 

There is to be seen a truth of co-operation among these beings that are attempting 
to maintain their existence, and if they are animate, their life, and fulfil their functions 
in the midst of constantly stirring changes and revolutions, a truth that lies far beyond 
their capacities. 

For  example,  the  elements  hasten  to  aid  animate  beings;  the  clouds  to  help  the 

vegetable kingdom; the vegetable kingdom, to help the animal  

 

166

kingdom; the animal kingdom, to help the human kingdom. Milk gushes forth from the 
breast,  like  the  spring  of Paradise,  to succour the infant; the fact that animate beings 
are given their needs and sustenance in a manner that transcends their capacity, from 
unexpected  places;  the  replenishing  of  the  cells  of  the  body  with  particles  of  food, 
through their being subjugated by their Sustainer and their employment at His merciful 
hands  —  all  of  these  and  numerous  other  examples  of  the  truth  of  co-operation 
demonstrate  the  universal  and  compassionate  dominicality of the Sustainer of All the 
Worlds, Who administers the cosmos like a palace. 

Solid,  inanimate  and  unfeeling  objects,  that  nonetheless  co-operate  with  each 
other in a sensitive and conscious fashion, must of necessity be caused to rush to each 
other’s  aid  by  the  power,  mercy,  and  command  of  a  Compassionate,  Wise,  and 
Glorious Sustainer. 

The  universal  co-operation  visible  throughout  the  cosmos;  the  comprehensive 
equilibrium and all-embracing preservation prevailing with the utmost regularity in all 
things, from the planets to the members, limbs and bodily particles of animate beings; 
the adorning whose pen ranges over the gilded face of the heavens, the decorated face 
of the earth, and the delicate faces of flowers; the ordering that prevails over all things, 
from the Milky Way and solar system down to fruits such as corn and pomegranates; 
the assigning of duties to all things, from the sun and the moon, the elements and the 
clouds,  down  to  honey-bees  —  all  of  these  great  truths  offer  a  testimony  of 
proportionate  greatness,  and  their  testimony  forms  the  second  wing  of the testimony 
offered by the cosmos. 

Since  the  Risale-i  Nur  has  established  and  clarified  this  great  testimony,  we  will 

content ourselves here with this brief indication. 

In brief allusion to the lesson of faith learned by our traveller from the cosmos, we 

said in the Eighteenth Degree of the First Station: 

There is no god but God, the Necessary Existent, the like of Whom cannot exist, 
other than Whom all things are contingent, the One, the Unique, to the Necessity 
of  Whose  Existence  in  Unity  points  the  cosmos,  the  great  book  incarnate,  the 
supreme  Qur’an  personified,  the  ornate  and  orderly  palace,  the  splendid  and 
well-arranged  city,  with  all  of  its  suras,  verses,  letters,  chapters,  parts,  pages, 
and  lines, with the agreement of its fundaments, species, parts and particles, its 
inhabitants and contents, what enters it and what leaves it; with the testimony of 
the  sublimity  of  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  truth  of createdness,  change  and 
contingency;  with  the  consensus  of  all  scholars  of the science of theology; with 
the  testimony  of  the  truth  of  the  changing  of  its  form  and  its  contents,  with 
wisdom and regularity, and  

 

167

the renewal of its letters and words with discipline and equilibrium; and with the 
testimony of the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the truth of co-operation, 
mutual  response  and  solidarity,  reciprocal  care,  balance  and  preservation, 
among all its beings, as is to be clearly observed. 

Then  the  ardent  and  inquisitive  traveller,  who  was  seeking  the  Creator  of  the 
world, had advanced by gaining knowledge of God indirectly through eighteen degrees 
and  approached,  at  the  end  of  an  ascension  in belief  to  the  throne  of  truth,  a station 
where in the presence of God, he addressed Him directly. He said to his own spirit:  

“In  the  noble  opening  sura  of  the  Qur’an,  the  verses  that  extend  from  the 
beginning  to  the  word  iyyaka  (You  alone)  are  like  a  form  of  praise  and  encomium 
uttered  indirectly;  but  the  word  iyyaka  signifies  a  coming  into  His  presence  and 
addresssing Him directly. So too we should abandon this indirect seeking and ask for 
the  object  of  search  from  the  object  of  our  search.  For  one  must  ask  the  sun,  that 
shows all things, concerning the sun, since that which shows all things will show itself 
even  more  clearly.  Just  as  we  perceive  and  know  the  sun  by  its  rays,  so  too  we  can 
strive  to  know  our  Creator,  in  accordance  with  our  capacities,  through  His  Most 
Beautiful Names and Sacred Attributes.” 

We will set forth here, with the utmost brevity and concision, two of the countless 
paths that lead to this goal; two of the infinite degrees of those two paths; and two of 
the abundant truths and details of those two degrees. 

THE  FIRST  TRUTH:  There  appears  visible  to  our  eye  a  comprehensive, 
permanent,  orderly  and  awesome  truth, one  that  changes,  transforms,  and  renews  all 
beings in heaven and on earth, with imperious and incessant activity. Within the truth 
of  that  in  every  way  wise  activity,  there  is  immediately  perceived  the  truth  of  the 
manifestation  of  dominicality,  and  in  turn,  within  the  truth  of  that  in  every  way 
merciful  manifestation  of  dominicality,  is  recognizable  the  truth  of  the  epiphany  of 
Divinity. 

From  this  continuous,  wise  and  imperious  activity,  the  deeds of  an All-Powerful 
and All-Knowing Doer can be discerned, as if from behind a veil. And from behind the 
veil  of  these  nurturing  and  administering  deeds  of  dominicality,  the  Divine  Names, 
manifest  in  all  things,  can  be  immediately  perceived.  Then  behind  the  veil  of  the 
Beautiful  Names,  manifest  with  Glory  and  Beauty,  can be deduced the existence and 
reality  of  the  seven sacred  attributes,  according  to  the  testimony  of  all  creation,  in  a 
life-giving,  powerful,  knowledgeable,  all-hearing,  all-seeing,  volitional  and  speech-
endowed form, there appears to the eye of faith in the heart,  

 

168

self-evidently, necessarily, and with full certainty, the existence of a Necessary Existent 
that  is described by these attributes, a Single One of Unity known by these Names, a 
Peerless and Eternal Doer, in a form more evidential and brilliant than the sun. 

For a beautiful and profound book necessarily presupposes the act of writing and 
a  well-built  house  presupposes  the act of  building; and the acts of writing beautifully 
and building well presuppose the names of writer and builder; and the titles of writer 
and  builder  obviously  imply  the  arts  and  attributes of writing and  building; and these 
arts  and  attributes  self-evidently  necessitate  one  who  will  be  qualified  by  the  names 
and attributes, and be the artist and craftsman. For just as it is impossible for there to 
be a deed without a doer, or a name without one designated by the name, so too it is 
not possible for there to be an attribute without one qualified by the attribute, and for 
there to be a craft without a craftsman. 

On  the  basis,  then,  of  this  truth  and  principle,  the  universe  with  all  the  beings  it 
contains  resembles  a  collection  of  profound  books  and  letters  written  by  the  pen  of 
Divine Determining, and countless buildings and palaces constructed with the hammer 
of  Divine  Power.    Each  of  these  singly  in  thousands  of  ways  and  together  in 
uncountable ways utters the following testimony:  

These  innumerable  dominical  and  merciful  deeds,  and  the  endless  manifestations 
of  the  thousand  and  one  Divine  Names  which  are  the  source  of  the  deeds,  and  the 
infinite manifestations of the seven transcendent attributes which are the source of the 
Beautiful  Names,  in  endless  and  infinite  ways  point  to  and  testify  to  the  necessary 
existence  and  unity  of  an  All-Glorious  Essence  Which  is  the  source  of  those  all-
embracing,  sacred  seven  attributes  and  is  qualified  by  them.  And  so  too  all  the 
instances of beauty, loveliness, perfection, and exquisiteness found in those beings self-
evidently  testify  all  together  to  the  sacred  beauties  and  perfections  of  the  dominical 
deeds,  and  the  Divine  Names,  and  attributes,  and  qualities,  which  are  fitting  and 
worthy of them, and to the sacred beauty of the Most Pure and Holy Essence. 

So the truth of dominicality that manifests itself within the truth of activity reveals 
and  makes  itself  known  in  qualities  and  acts  such  as  creating,  originating,  fashioning 
and  bringing  into  being,  with  knowledge  and  wisdom;  determining,  forming, 
administering  and  changing  with  regularity  and  balance;  transforming,  causing  to 
descend and perfecting, with purpose and will; and feeding, nurturing, and bestowing 
generosity  and  bounty,  with  tenderness  and  mercy.  And  within  the  truth  of  the 
manifestation of dominicality, the truth of the immediately perceived revelation of  

 

169

Divinity makes itself known and recognized through the compassionate and munificent 
manifestations  of  the  Beautiful  Names  and  through  the  Glorious  and  Beauteous 
manifestations  of  the  seven  affirmative  attributes:  Life,  Knowledge,  Power,  Will, 
Hearing, Sight, and Speech. 

Just  as  the  attribute  of  Speech  makes  the  Most  Sacred  Essence  known  through 
revelation  and  inspiration,  so  too  the  attribute  of  Power  makes  the  Essence  known 
through  its  skilled  works and effects, each of which is like a word assuming external 
shape. Presenting the cosmos from end to end under the aspect of an incarnate book of 
discernment, it describes and makes known a Powerful Possessor of Glory.  

As for the attribute of Knowledge, it makes known a single Most Sacred Essence, 
through each of the wise, well-ordered and balanced objects of creation, through each 
creature administered, directed, adorned, and made distinct by God’s Knowledge. 

As for the attribute of Life, it is proven not only by its own evidences, but also by 
all the works that proclaim God’s Power, by all the well-ordered, wise, balanced and 
adorned forms and states that indicate God’s Knowledge, as well as by all proofs of all 
other  attributes.  Thus  Life,  showing  as  witnesses  all  animate  beings,  which  act  as 
mirrors  reflecting  those  abundant proofs, makes known an Eternally  Living and Self-
Subsistent Essence. 

It is also this attribute that constantly changes the cosmos, in order to produce in 
it ever-fresh and various manifestations and designs, and turns it into a supreme mirror 
composed of countless smaller mirrors. Similarly, the attributes of Seeing and Hearing, 
Willing and Speaking, each reveal and make known the Most Sacred Essence, just as 
the cosmos does. 

Then, too, just as  the attributes point to the existence of the Possessor of Glory, 
they  also  indicate  in  most  manifest  fashion  the  existence  and  reality  of  life,  and  the 
livingness and permanence  of that Essence. For Knowing is a sign of Life; Hearing is 
an indication of Life; Seeing belongs only to the living; Will takes place only with Life. 
Purposive  Power  is  found  only  in  living  beings,  and  Speech  is  a  task  for  those 
endowed with Knowledge and Life. 

It follows from the foregoing that the attribute of Life has proofs seven times as 
numerous as the cosmos, and evidences that proclaim its existence and the existence of 
the  One  Whom  it  qualifies.  Thus  it  comes  to  be  the  foundation  and  source  of  the 
attributes,  the  origin  and  support  of  the  Supreme  Name.  Since  the  Risale-i  Nur 
establishes  this  first  truth  with  powerful  proofs  and  clarifies  it,  we  will  content 
ourselves now with a drop from this ocean. 

 

Speech. 

170

THE SECOND TRUTH: Divine discourse, which proceeds from the attribute of 

Were the sea to become ink for the words of my Sustainer...27 

According  to  the  inner  sense  of  this  verse,  Divine  discourse  is  infinite.  The  clearest 
sign  demonstrating  the  existence  of  a  being  is  his  speech.  This  truth,  therefore, 
constitutes an infinite testimony to the existence and unity of the Pre-Eternal Speaker. 
Since  two  powerful  evidences  of this truth are revelation and inspiration, set  forth in 
the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Degrees of this treatise; another broad proof is provided 
by  sacred  and  heavenly  Books,  as  indicated  in  the  Tenth  Degree;  and  a further most 
brilliant and comprehensive proof is furnished by the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition, 
as discussed in the Seventeenth Degree — for all these reasons we refer our readers to 
those Degrees for the exposition and affirmation of this truth. Enough for us and for 
our  traveller,  who  was  unable  to  proceed  beyond  this  point,  are  the  lights  and 
mysteries contained in the sublime verse that proclaims this truth in miraculous fashion 
and adds it own testimony to all of the preceding ones: 

God  bears  witness  that  there  is  no  god  but  He,  as  do  the  angels  and  the 
possessors  of  knowledge;  steadfast  in  equity;  there  is  no  god  but  He,  the 
Mighty, the Wise!28 

In allusion to the core of the lesson learned by our traveller at this sacred Station, 

we said, in the Nineteenth Degree of the First Station: 

There  is  no  god  but  God,  the Necessary Existent, the One, the Unique; His are 
the  Beautiful  Names,  His  are  the  Supreme  Attributes,  and  His  is  the  Most 
Sublime  Similitude.  To  His  Necessary  Existence  in  Unity  points  the  necessarily 
existent  Essence,  with  the  consensus  of  all  its  sacred  and  comprehensive 
attributes and all of its Beautiful Names, manifested according to the consensus 
of  His  dominant  qualities  and  deeds.  By  the  testimony  of  the  sublimity  of  the 
truth of the self-revelation of Divinity in the manifestation of dominicality, in the 
permanence  of  imperious  activity  through  the  act  of  bringing  into  being, 
creating,  making  and  originating,  in  will  and  in  power;  and  through  the  act  of 
determining, forming and regulating, in choice and in wisdom; through the act of 
expending,  preserving,  ordering,  administering,  and  nurturing  in  purposiveness 
and  mercy,  in  complete  order  and  equilibrium;  as  too  by  the  testimony  of  the 
sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the truth of the mysteries of the verse: God 
bears witness  

                                             

27 Qur’an, 18:109. 
28 Qur’an, 3:18. 

 

171

that  there  is  no  god  but  He,  as  do the angels and  the possessors of knowledge; 
steadfast in equity; there is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise! 

NOTE 

Each of the truths that offer their testimony in the Nineteen Degrees of the First 
Chapter of the Second Station above not only indicate Necessary Existence through 
existence and presence, but also through their comprehensiveness, attest God’s unity 
and oneness. But since they prove existence most clearly and explicitly, we regarded 
them first as proofs of Necessary Existence. 

As for the Second Chapter of the Second Station, the truths in question will be 
designated instead as proofs of Divine unity, insofar as they explicitly prove unity, 
and  implicitly  necessity.  In  reality,  each  proves  the  other;  unity  proves  necessity, 
and necessity proves unity. In order to indicate the difference, we said repeatedly in 
the  First  Chapter,  “By  the  testimony  of the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of 
the  truth  of....,”  while  in  the  Second  Chapter  we  shall  recurrently  say,  “By  the 
witnessing  of  the  sublimity  of  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  truth  of...,”  thus 
indicating the evident visibility of Divine unity. I had the intention of explaining the 
degrees of the Second Chapter, just as I did in the First Chapter, but on account of 
various  obstacles  I  am  compelled  to  be  summary  and  concise.  I  leave  it  to  other 
parts of the Risale-i Nur to expound these matters as they deserve to be expounded. 

 

172

Second Chapter 
Concerning Proofs of the Divine Unity 

 [The  traveller  who  had  been  sent  to  the  world in order to attain faith, who 
journeyed  through  the  whole  cosmos  in  his  mind  in  order  to  ask  all  things 
concerning his Creator, to seek his Sustainer in every place and find his God, 
with the utmost certainty, at the point of Necessary Existence — this traveller 
said to his intellect: “Come, let us depart on a new journey in order to behold 
the proofs of the unity of our Necessarily Existent Creator.”  
They set out together. At the First Stopping-Place, they saw four sacred truths 
prevailing  over  the  whole  cosmos,  truths  that  self-evidently necessitated the 
unity of God.] 

THE FIRST TRUTH: Absolute Divinity 

The absorption of each class of men in a mode of worship dictated by their innate 
dispositions;  the  species  of  worship  engaged  in  by  other  animate  beings,  as  well  as 
inanimate  beings,  through  the  performance  of  their  essential  functions;  the  way  in 
which  all  material  and  immaterial  bounties  and  gifts  in  the  cosmos  become  means 
inciting men to worship and thanks, to praise and gratitude; the fashion in which all the 
manifestations  of  the  Unseen  and  epiphanies  of  the  spirit,  revelation  and  inspiration, 
unanimously  proclaim  the  exclusive  fitness  of  one  God  to  receive  worship  —  all  of 
this,  in  most  evidential  fashion,  proves  the  reality  and  dominance  of  a  single  and 
absolute  Divinity.  If  the  truth  of  such  a  Divinty  exists,  it  can  in  no  way  accept 
partnership.  For  those  who  respond  to  Divinity    —that  is,  the  fitness  to  be 
worshipped—  with  thanks  and  worship,  are  the  conscious  and  animate  fruits  on  the 
highest  branches  of  the  tree  of  the  cosmos.  If  others  were  able  to  gratify  and  place 
under  their  obligation  those  conscious  beings  in  such  fashion  as  to  make  them  turn 
away  from  and  forget  their  true  object  of  worship  —Who  may,  indeed,  be  swiftly 
forgotten, because of his invisibility— this would be in such utter contradiction to the 
essence of Divinty and its sacred purposes that it could in no way be allowed. It is for 
this reason that the Qur’an so repeat 

 

173

edly  and  with  such  vehemence  refutes  polytheism  and  threatens  the  polytheists  with 
Hell-fire. 

THE SECOND TRUTH: Absolute Dominicality 

The ubiquitous workings of a wise and compassionate hidden hand throughout the 
cosmos, especially in animate beings and their nurturing and development, everywhere 
in the same fashion and yet in a totally unexpected form, must be, without doubt, the 
emanation and light of an absolute dominicality and a decisive proof of its reality. 

An  absolute  dominicality  cannot  accept  any  partnership  for  since  the  important 
aims  and  purposes  of  dominicality,  such  as  the  manifestation  of  its  beauty,  the 
proclamation of its perfection, the revelation of its precious arts and the display of its 
hidden  accomplishments,  are  combined  and  concentrated  in  particulars  and  animate 
beings,  the  slightest  attribution  to  God  of  a  partner,  when  entering  even  the  most 
particular of things and the smallest of animate beings, will frustrate the attainment of 
those  purposes  and  destroy  those  aims.  Averting  the  faces  of  conscious  beings  from 
those  purposes  and  the  One  Who  conceived  them  toward  causes  will  be  totally 
opposed and hostile to the essence of dominicality, and absolute dominicality cannot in 
any way countenance it. 

The  abundant  proclamations  in  the  Qur’an  of  God’s  sanctity  and  transcendence, 
its  verses  and  words,  even  its  letters  and  their  shapes,  are  constant  guides  to  God’s 
unity, made necessary by the mystery we have just expounded. 

THE THIRD TRUTH: Perfections 

The self-evident testimony to the existence of the truth of perfections given by all 
the exalted instances of wisdom in the universe, all its wondrous beauties, its just laws, 
its  wise  purposes,  and  in  particular  its  testimony  to  the  perfections  of  the  Creator, 
Who brought forth the cosmos out of the void and then administered it in every way 
miraculously and beauteously, as well as the perfections of man, who is the conscious 
mirror of the Creator — such testimony is extremely clear. 

There exists then the truth of perfections, and the certainty that the Creator Who 
fashioned  the  cosmos  in  perfection  must  Himself  possess  perfection.  Further,  the 
perfections  of  man,  the  most  important  fruit  of  the  universe,  vicegerent  of  the  earth, 
the  beloved  and  most  valued  object  of  His  creation  —  these  are  also  established  as 
true.  Therefore,  to  assign  partners  to  God  would  be  unacceptable  and  false,  for  it 
would  condemn  to  destruction  and  perdition  all  of  the  perfect  and  wise  beings  we 
behold with our eyes; it would turn the cosmos into a vain plaything of accident, a  

 

174

place  of  amusement  for  nature,  a  cruel  slaughterhouse  for  the  animate,  an  awesome 
house of sorrows for the conscious; it would reduce man, whose perfections are visible 
in  his  works,  to  the  level  of  the  most  wretched,  distraught  and  vile  animal;  and  it 
would draw a veil across the infinite perfections of the Creator that are reflected in the 
mirror of all beings, thus nullifying the result of His activity and denying His creativity. 
Since assigning partners to God contradicts Divine, human and cosmic perfections 
and  its  denial  of  them  has  been  established  and  explained  in  the  First  Station  of  the 
Second  Ray  (devoted  to  three  ‘Fruits’  of  Divine  unity)  with  strong  and  decisive 
proofs, we refer our readers that work and cut short the discussion here. 

THE FOURTH TRUTH: Sovereignty 

Whoever  looks  at  the  cosmos  with  comprehensive  attention,  will  see  it  to 
resemble a most prosperous and active kingdom, a city administered most wisely and 
ruled most firmly; he sees all things and all species obediently engaged in a particular 
function. 

According to the military metaphor contained in the verse, 
God’s are the armies of the heavens and earth,29 

the  prevailing  creative  commands,  imperious  orders,  and  kingly  laws  enunciated  in 
those  numerous  armies,  that  extend  from  the  hosts  of the atom, the battalions of the 
vegetable kingdom, the brigades of the animal kingdom, to the armies of the stars, and 
embrace both the lowliest soldier and the loftiest commander — they all indicate self-
evidently the existence of an absolute sovereignty and a universal authority. 

There  is  then  a  truth  of  absolute  sovereignty,  and  there  can  be  no  truth  of 

assigning partners to God. For according to the decisive truth of the verse, 

Were there to be in the heavens and earth gods other than God, verily they 
would be corrupted,30 

if numerous hands all engage assertively in the same task, the result will be confusion. 
If there are two kings in one country, or even two headmen in one district, order will 
disappear,  and  administration  be  replaced  by  anarchy.  But  on  the  contrary  we  see 
everywhere such order, from the wing of the fly to the lamps of the heavens, from the 
cells  of  the  body  to  the  signs  of  the  planets,  that  there  is  no  possibility  for  the 
intervention of any partner in God’s affairs. 

                                             

29 Qur’an, 48:4. 
30 Qur’an, 21:22. 

 

175

Sovereignty  is,  moreover,  a  station  of  dignity;  to  accept  a  rival  would  flout  the 
dignity of sovereignty. The fact that man, who needs the assistance of many people on 
account of his impotence, will kill his brothers and offspring in the cruellest fashion for 
the  sake  of  some  petty,  apparent  and  temporary  sovereignty,  shows  that  sovereignty 
rejects all notion of partnership. If so feeble a one acts thus for the sake of so petty a 
sovereignty,  it  follows  that  the  Possessor  of  Absolute  Power,  the  Master  of  All 
Creation,  will  never  permit  one  other  than  Himself  to  participate  in  His  sacred 
sovereignty, the means to His real and universal dominicality and Divinity. 

Since  this  truth  has  been  established  with  firm  proofs  in  numerous  places 
throughout the Risale-i Nur and especially the Second Station of the Second Ray, we 
refer the reader to those pages for further discussion of it. 

Through  witnessing  these  four  truths,  our  traveller  came  to  know  Divine  unity 
with the degree of certain and clear witnessing. His faith shone, and with all his power 
he said, “There is no god but God, He is One, He has no partner.” In brief allusion to 
the  lesson  he  derived  from  this  station,  we  said  in  the  Second  Chapter  of  the  First 
Station: 

There is no god but God, the One, the Unique, to Whose Unity and the Necessity 
of  Whose  Existence  point  the  witnessing  of  the  sublimity  of  the  truth  of  the 
manifestation  of  absolute  Divinity,  as  well  as  the  witnessing  of  the  sublimity  of 
the comprehensiveness of the truth of the manifestation of absolute dominicality 
that  requires  Unity,  the  witnessing  of the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of 
the  truth  of  the  perfections  that  arise  from  unity,  and  the  witnessing  of  the 
sublimity  of  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  truth  of  absolute  sovereignty,  that 
prevents and contradicts the existence of any partnership. 

Then that restless traveller addressed his heart and said: “The fact that the people 
of faith, and particularly those affiliated with a sufi order, are constantly repeating the 
words,  ‘no  god  but  He,’  and  recalling  and  proclaiming  God’s  unity,  is  an  indication 
that  the  affirmation  of  God’s  unity  comprises  many  degrees.  Such  affirmation  is 
moreover  a  most  enjoyable,  most  valuable,  and  most  exalted  sacred  duty,  instinctive 
function, and act of worship. Let us then in order to attain a further degree, open the 
door of another stopping-place in this abode of instruction. For the true affirmation of 
God’s  unity  we  seek  is  not  some  imaginary  species  of  knowledge.  It  is  rather  an 
affirmation  that  in  terms  of  logic  is  deemed  the  opposite  of  imagination,  that  is  far 
more valuable than cognition based on imagination, that is the result of proof, that is 
designated a knowledge.” 

 

176

The true affirmation of God’s unity is a judgement, a confirmation, an assent and 
acceptance  that  can  find  its  Sustainer  present  with  all  things,  that  sees  in all things a 
path  leading  to  its  Creator,  and  does  not  regard  anything  as  an  obstacle  to  His 
presence. For otherwise it would always be necessary to tear and cast aside the veil of 
the cosmos in order to find its Sustainer.  “Onward, then,” said the traveller to himself, 
as he knocked at the door of God’s Sublimity and Grandeur. He entered the Stopping-
Place  of  God’s  deeds  and  workings,  the world of creation  and origination, and there 
he  saw  that  five  comprehensive  truths  were  prevailing  over  the  entire  cosmos,  and 
offering self-evident proof of the Divine unity. 

THE FIRST TRUTH: that of Grandeur and Sublimity. 

Since  this  truth  is  explained  with  different  proofs  in  the  Second  Station  of  the 
Second Ray and various other places in the Risale-i Nur, we restrict ourselves here to 
the following: 

The Being that creates and then administers at a single time and in a single fashion 
the  stars  that  are  thousands  of  years  distant  from  each  other;  that  creates  at  a single 
time  and  in  a  single  form  the  countless  members  of  the  same  species  of  flower, 
distributed  over  the  east  and  the  west,  the  north  and  south  of  the  globe;  that 
administers,  nurtures,  quickens,  distinguishes  and  adorns  more  than  two  hundred 
thousand  different  types  of  plant  and  species of animal in five or six weeks, with the 
utmost regularity and equilibrium, without any confusion, defect or error, in order to 
provide every spring on the face of the earth more than a hundred thousand specimens 
of  the  supreme  resurrection,  and  thus  prove  before  man’s  eyes  a  remarkable  event, 
now  belonging  to  the  past  and  the  realm  of  the  Unseen,  namely  the  creation  of  the 
heavens and the earth in six days, as indicated in the verse, 

He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six days;31 

the Being that causes the earth to revolve, as evidenced in the verse, 
He merges night with day, and day with night,32 

and  turns  the  night  into  the  page  on which  the  events  of  the  day  are  written  —  this 
same Being knows and administers according to His own will, all at the same time, the 
most  secret  and  obscure  thoughts  that  occur  to  men’s  hearts.  Since  each  of  the 
aforementioned  acts  is  in  reality  one  act,  it  follows  that  their  Glorious  Doer  is  a 
Unique  and  Powerful  Being,  enjoying  such  grandeur  and  sublimity  that  nowhere,  in 
nothing, in no  

                                             

31 Qur’an, 57:4. 
32 Qur’an, 3:27. 

 

177

way,  does  it  leave  the  slightest  possibility  for  the  acceptance  of  partnership;  on  the 
contrary, it uproots all such possibility. 

Since such sublime power and grandeur exist and since that grandeur is at the very 
apex  of  perfection  and  comprehends  everything,  it  is  certainly  in  no  way  possible  to 
permit or allow any attribution of partners to that Unique and Powerful Being, for so 
doing would ascribe impotence or need to that power, fault to that grandeur, defect to 
that  perfection, and impose restriction on that comprehensiveness. No sound intellect 
could deem this possible. 

The  assignment  of  partners  to  God,  is  then  by  virtue  of  the  offence  it  causes  to 
God’s Grandeur, the dignity of his Glory and His Sublimity, so grave a crime that the 
Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition decrees with an earnest threat, 

God  does  not  pardon  the  assignment  to  Him  of  a  partner;  He  pardons 
whatever is lesser than that.33 

THE  SECOND  TRUTH:  The  absoluteness,  the  comprehensiveness,  and 

appearance in infinite form of the dominical deeds seen at work in the cosmos. 

It  is  only  God’s  wisdom  and will  that limits and restricts those deeds, as well as 
the  inherent  capacities  of  the  objects  and  places  in  which  they  manifest  themselves. 
Stray  chance,  dumb  nature,  blind  force,  unconscious  causality  and  the  elements  that 
without restriction are scattered in every direction — none of these can have any part 
in  the  most  balanced,  wise  perspicacious,  life-giving,  orderly  and  firm  deeds  of  the 
Creator. They are used, rather, by the command, will, and power of the Glorious Doer 
as an apparent veil to conceal His power. 
Three out of innumerable examples: 
We will set forth three from among the numerous subtle points that relate to the 

three deeds indicated in three continuous verses in Sura al-Nahl. 

The First: 

Your Sustainer inspired in the bee that it should seek a dwelling-place in the 
mountains.34 

The bee is, with respect to its disposition and function, such a miracle of God’s power 
that a whole sura, Sura al-Nahl, has been named after it. For to inscribe in the minute 
head of that little honey-machine a complete  

                                             

33 Qur’an, 4:48. 
34 Qur’an, 16:68. 

 

178

programme for the fulfilment of its important task;  to place in its diminutive stomach 
the most delicious of foods and to ripen it there; to place in its sting poison capable of 
destroying and killing animate beings, without causing any harm to its own body or the 
member  in  question  —  to  do  all  this  without  the  utmost  care  and  knowledge,  with 
exceeding  wisdom  and  purposiveness,  partakes  of  a  perfect  orderliness  and 
equilibrium,  and  hence  unconscious,  disorderly,  disequilibriated  nature  and  accident 
could never interfere or participate in any of this. 

The  appearance and comprehensiveness of this Divine craft, this dominical deed, 
which  is  miraculous  in  three  separate  respects,  in  the  countless  bees  that  are  found 
scattered over the earth, with the same wisdom, the same care, the same symmetry, at 
the same time and in the same fashion — this is a self-evident proof of God’s unity. 

The Second Verse: 

There is for you a lesson in cattle. From what is within their bodies, between 
excretions  and  blood,  we  produce  for  your  drink, milk, pure and agreeable 
to those who drink it.35 

This  verse  is  a  decree  overflowing  with  useful  instruction.  To place in the nipples of 
cows,  camels,  goats  and  sheep,  as well as human mothers, in the midst of blood and 
excrement  but without  being  polluted  by  them,  a substance the exact opposite, pure, 
clean,  pleasant,  nutritive  and  white  milk,  and  to  inspire  in  their  hearts  tenderness 
toward their young that is still more pleasant, sweeter and more valuable than milk — 
this requires such a degree of mercy, wisdom, knowledge, power, will and care that it 
cannot in any way be the work of turbulent chance, of the tangled elements, or of blind 
forces. 

The manifestation, workings and comprehensiveness of so miraculous a dominical 
art and so wise a Divine deed, all over the face of the globe and in the countless hearts 
and breasts of innumerable mothers of hundreds of thousands of species, in the same 
instant,  the  same  fashion,  with  the  same  wisdom  and  the  same  care  —  this  too 
constitutes a self-evident proof of God’s unity.  

The Third Verse: 

From  the  fruits  of  the  date-palm  and  the  vine  you  take  sugar  and  fine 
nourishment; verily therein is a sign for a people possessing intelligence.36 

This verse invites our attention to the date and to grapes, saying, “For  

                                             

35 Qur’an, 16:66. 
36 Qur’an, 16:67. 

 

179

those of intelligence, there is great proof, argument and evidence of the Divine unity in 
these two fruits. These two fruits yield nurture and sustenance, fresh and dry fruit, and 
give  rise  to  most  delicious  forms  of  food;  yet  the  trees  that  bear  them  stand  in 
waterless  sand and dry soil, and are thus miracles of power and wonders of wisdom. 
They are each of them like a factory producing sweet sugar, a machine manufacturing 
honeylike  syrup,  a  work  of  art  created  with  perfect  order  and  sensitive  balance, 
wisdom and care; hence anyone with a grain of intelligence will say on contemplating 
them,  ‘The  one  who  made  them  in  this  fashion  may  very  well  be  the  Creator  of the 
whole cosmos.’” 

For in front of our eyes each vine branch the thickness of a finger will hold twenty 
bunches  of  grapes,  and  each  bunch  will  in  turn  contain  hundreds  of  sugary  grapes, 
each like a litle pump emitting syrup. To clothe the surface of each grape with a fine, 
delicate, thin, and colourful protection; to place in its delicate and soft heart seeds with 
their  hard  shells,  which  are  like  its  retentive  faculty,  programme,  and  the  story of its 
life; to manufacture in its stomach a sweetmeat like the helva of Paradise, a honey like 
the water of Kawthar; to create an infinite number of such grapes over the face of the 
entire earth, with the same care and  wisdom and wonderful art, and at the same time 
and in the same fashion — this proves in self-evident  fashion that the one who fulfils 
these  tasks  is  the  Creator  of  the  whole  cosmos,  and  this  deed,  requiring  as  it  does 
infinite power and limitless wisdom, can be only His deed. 

Yes, blind and stray, disorderly and unconscious, aimless, aggressive, and anarchic 
forces,  nature  and  causality,  cannot  have  anything  to  do  with  this  most  sensitive 
balance,  this  most  skilful  art,  this  most  wise  scheme.  They  cannot  even  stretch  out 
their  hands  toward  it.  It  falls  to  them  only  to  be  employed  through  the  dominical 
command as passive objects, as curtainholders. 

Just  like  the  three  points  proving  Divine  unity  contained  in  the  three  truths 
indicated  in  the  three  verses,  the  countless  manifestations  and  workings  of  infinite 
dominical  deeds  attest  unanimously  the  unity  of  a  Single  One  of  Unity,  the  All-
Glorious One.  

THE  THIRD  TRUTH:  The  creation  of  beings,  particularly  plants  and  animals, 
with  absolute  speed  and  absolute  orderliness;  with  absolute  ease  and  extreme  skill, 
talent, ability, and order; with great value and distinction, despite extreme abundance 
and intermingling. 

Yes, to produce with extreme swiftness and in extreme abundance, most skilfully 
and  artistically,  with  great  ease  and  facility  combined  with  the  utmost  care  and 
orderliness, with great value and distinction despite  

 

180

abundance and intermingling, without any form of confusion or deficiency — this can 
be  achieved  only  by  a  Unique  Being  Whose  power  is  such  that  nothing  appears 
difficult to it. 

For that power it is as easy to create stars as atoms, the greatest as the smallest, a 
whole species as a single member of a species, a sublime and comprehensive universal 
as  a  restricted  and  petty  particular;  it  is  as  easy  for  Him  to  revivify  and  quicken the 
whole earth as to do the same with a tree or to erect a tree as tall as a mountain as it is 
to produce a seed no bigger than a fingernail. All of these deeds He performs in front 
of our eyes. 

So  the  exposition,  the  solution,  the  uncovering  and  proof  of  the  mystery  of  this 
degree of the assertion of the Divine unity, this Third Truth, this word of unity — the 
mystery  that  the  greatest  universal  is  like  the smallest particular without the slightest 
difference  between  them  —this  beneficial  wisdom,  this  supreme  talisman,  this  riddle 
beyond  the  reach  of  the  intellect,  this  most  significant  foundation  of Islam, this  most 
profound source of faith, this greatest basis of the Divine unity— the setting forth of 
all  this  opens  the  talisman  of  the  Qur’an,  and  makes  it  possible  to  know  the  most 
secret  and  unknowable  riddle  of  the  creation  of  all  beings,  a  riddle  that  reduces 
philosophy to impotence. 

Thanks and praise one hundred thousand times the letters of the Risale-i Nur be 
to  the  Compassionate  Creator  that  the  Risale-i  Nur  has  solved,  uncovered  and 
established  this  wondrous  talisman,  this  wondrous  riddle.  It  has  been  proven  with 
decisive arguments, to the same degree of certainty that twice two is four, particularly 
in the discussion of “He is powerful over all things” toward the end of the Twentieth 
Letter;  in  the  section  concerning  God’s  being  an  all-powerful  agent  in  the  Twenty-
Ninth  Word,  one  devoted  to  the  resurrection;  and  in  the  section  proving  the  Divine 
power  in  the  degrees  of  “God  is  Most  Great”  in  the  Twenty-Ninth  Flash,  written  in 
Arabic. For that reason we assign to those parts of the Risale-i Nur the exposition of 
this matter, wishing, however, to set out briefly the foundations and proofs that solve 
this mystery and to allude to thirteen mysteries that resemble thirteen steps, or a list of 
contents.  I  have  indeed  written  the  first  and  second mysteries, but unfortunately two 
powerful  obstacles,  material  and  immaterial,  have  caused  me  to  abandon  the 
remainder.  

T h e  F i r s t  M y s t e r y : If something be essential, its opposite cannot have 
access to the essence defined by that thing. For that would be equivalent to the union 
of  opposites,  which  is  an  absurdity.  Now  with  regard  to  this  principle,  since  God’s 
power is related to His Essence and  

 

181

is an essential concomitant of His Most Sacred Essence, impotence —the opposite of 
power— cannot in any way gain access to that All-Powerful Essence. 

Moreover,  the  existence  of  degrees  within  a  thing  comes  about  through  the 
intervention in it of its opposite. For example, strong and weak degrees of light result 
from  the  intervention  of  darkness;  high  and  low  degrees  of  heat  proceed  from  the 
admixture of  coldness;  and  greater  and  lesser  amounts of strength are determined by 
the  intervention  and  opposition  of  resistance.  It  is  therefore  impossible  that  degrees 
should exist in that power of the Divine Essence. He creates all things as if they were 
but a single thing. And since degrees do not exist in the power of the Divine Essence 
and it does not admit of weakness or deficiency, no obstacle can in any way obstruct it 
nor can the creation of anything cause it difficulty. 

Since,  then,  nothing  is  difficult  for  God’s  power,  He  creates  the  supreme 
resurrection with the same ease as spring; spring with the same facility as a tree; and a 
tree  with  as little trouble as a flower. Further, He creates a  flower as artistically as a 
tree;  a  tree  as  miraculously  as  a  spring;  and  a  spring  as  comprehensively  and 
wondrously as a resurrection. All of this He accomplishes in front of our eyes. 

It has been proved in the Risale-i Nur with decisive and strong proofs that if there 
were  no  Divine  unity,  the  making  of  a  flower  would  be  as  difficult as a tree or even 
more difficult; the making of a tree would be as hard a spring or even more difficult; 
and creation would even lose its value and artistic quality. An animate being that now 
takes  a  minute  to  produce  would  be  produced  with  difficulty  in  one  year,  or  maybe 
never at all. 

It is then on account of this mystery that these fruits, flowers, trees and animals, 
that are extremely valuable despite their ubiquitousness and abundance, and extremely 
artistic  despite  the  swiftness  and  ease  of  their  fashioning,  emerge  in  regular  fashion 
onto  the  plain  of  being  and  assume  their  functions.  Proclaiming  God’s  glory,  they 
accomplish their duties and depart, leaving behind their seed in their stead. 

S e c o n d  M y s t e r y : Through the mystery of luminosity, transparency, and 
obedience, just as through the manifestation of its essential power, a single sun reflects 
it  light  in  a  single  mirror,  so  too,  through  the  Divine  command  and  due  to  the 
extensive  activity  of  that  unrestricted  power,  it can easily bestow the same reflection 
—together  with  its  light  and  heat—  on  innumerable  mirrors,  shining  objects,  and 
droplets. Great and small are the same, there is no difference between them. 
Similarly, like a single word can enter the ear of one man without  

 

182

trouble, so too due to the infinite breadth of boundless creativity, it may enter a million 
ears,  with  dominical  permission.  And  a  single  light  like  an  eye,  or  a  single  luminous 
spirit  being  like  Gabriel,  through  the  infinite  breadth  of  dominical  activity  within the 
manifestation  of  mercy,  may  be  present  in,  or  look  at,  or  enter  thousands  of  places 
through  Divine  power,  as  easily  as  they  look  at  or  enter  a  single  place.  There  is  no 
difference between many and few. 

The pre-eternal power of God’s essence is the most subtle and choicest of lights, 
the  light  of  all  lights;  the  quiddities,  essences  and  inner  dimensions  of  all  things  are 
luminous and lustrous as mirrors; all things, from the atom, the plant, and the animate 
creature  to the stars, the suns and the moons, are extremely obedient and submissive 
to the command of that power of the Divine Essence and subordinate to the orders of 
that  pre-eternal  power.  It  is  for  all  of  these  reasons  entirely  natural  that  innumerable 
things should be created with the same ease as a single thing and placed side by side 
with  each  other.  No  concern  or  task  interferes  with  another.  Great  and  small,  many 
and few, particular and universal — all are the same for that power, for which nothing 
is difficult. 

As  was  said  in  the  Tenth  and  Twenty-Ninth  Words,  through  the  mysteries  of 
order, equilibrium, obedience to command and submission to order, that power causes 
a great ship as big as a hundred houses, to move and advance as a child’s finger pushes 
his toy. 

As a commander will send a single infantryman into battle with an order from his 
throne, so too he may throw a whole obedient army into the fray with the same single 
order. 

Let  us  suppose  that  two  mountains  are  in  a  state  of  equilibrium  in  a  large  and 
sensitive  balance.  In  the  same  way  that  a  single  walnut  would  cause  one  pan  to  rise 
and the other  to fall if placed on one side of a balance containing two eggs, it would 
produce the same result with the scale containing the mountains; through a wise law it 
would  cause one  pan  with its mountain to rise to the  mountain-top, and the other to 
descend with its mountain to the bottom of the valley. 

Since  there  is  to  be  found  in  God’s  absolute,  infinite,  luminous,  essential  and 
eternal  power  a  Divine  justice  and  unending  wisdom  that  is  the  origin,  source, 
fundament and beginning of all order, regularity and equilibrium in creation; and since 
all  things,  particular  and  universal,  small  and  great,  are  obedient  to  the  command  of 
that  power  and  submissive  to its workings — it follows that God causes the  stars to 
revolve  and  to  move,  through  the  wisdom  of  His  order,  as  easily  as  He  rotates  and 
moves the atoms. 

 

183

In  spring,  just  as  He  brings  to  life  a  single  fly  with  a  single  order,  so  too  He 
bestows life with the same ease and the same command on the whole species of fly, as 
well  as  all  the  hosts  of  plants  and  animals,  through  the  mystery  of  the  wisdom  and 
equilibrium inherent in His power, and then sends them forth onto the plain of life. 

In the same way that he swiftly gives life to a tree in spring and infuses vitality in 
its bones, with His wise and just absolute power, He also resurrects in the spring the 
corpse  of  the  vast  earth  and  brings  into  being  hundreds  of  thousands  of  different 
specimens of resurrection similar to the tree, all this with the greatest of ease. 

With His creative command, He brings the earth back to life. By the decree of, 

There will be but a single cry, then they shall all be brought nigh unto Us;37 

that  is,  “all  men and jinn, with a single cry and command shall be brought to Us and 
made present at the plain of resurrection.” Again, by His command, 
The hour shall be but a blinking of the eye, or even closer;38 

that  is, the bringing about of resurrection and the gathering that follows upon it shall 
take no longer than the opening and closing of an eye, or even less. Then there is the 
verse, 

Your creation and resurrection is as a single soul,39 

meaning  the  following:  “O  men!  To  create  you  and  to  bring  you  to  life,  to resurrect 
and gather you, is as easy for me as bringing one soul to life; it presents no problem to 
My power.” According to the inner sense of these three verses, God will bring all men 
and jinn, all animals, spirit beings and angels to the field of the Supreme Gathering and 
the  great  balance  with  a  single  command  and  with great ease. One concern does not 
interfere with another. 

The  remaining  Mysteries,  from the third and fourth as far as the thirteenth, have 

been postponed to another time in a fashion disagreeable to me. 

THE  FOURTH  TRUTH:  The  existence  and  appearance  of  all  beings  proclaim 
the  Divine  unity  in  a  self-evident  fashion  through  their  numerous  points  of  unity and 
convergence, such as being simultaneously  

                                             

37 Qur’an, 36:53. 
38 Qur’an, 16:77. 
39 Qur’an, 31:28. 

 

184

together and yet separate and unique; resembling one another; being the miniature or 
magnified  versions  of  each  other;  being  some,  universals  and  species,  and  some, 
particulars  and  individuals;  resembling  each  other  in  the  stamp  of  innate  disposition; 
having  affinity  in  the  impress  of  artistry;  and  aiding  and  complementing  each  other 
with  respect  to  their  innate  functions.  They  establish  the  unity  of  their  Maker.  And 
with respect to dominicality, make it clear that the cosmos is a universal and a whole 
that may not be divided or fragmented. 

For example, in each spring, to create, order and sustain the innumerable members 
of  the  four  hundred  thousand  different  species  of  plants  and  animals,  together  and 
intermingled,  in  a  single  moment  and  in  the  same  fashion,  without  any  error  or 
mistake, with the utmost wisdom and perfection of artistry; to create all the different 
species  of  bird,  from  flies,  which  are  like  birds  in  miniature,  to  eagles  which  are  the 
supreme  specimens  of  the  species,  then  to  equip  them  with  the  means  of  flight  and 
subsistence  and  to  cause them  to  journey  through  the  realm  of  the air; to imprint on 
the countenances of each of the birds in miraculous fashion a stamp of artistry, on the 
body  of  each  of  them  a  seal  of  wisdom,  and  in  the  quiddity  of  each  of  them,  in 
sustaining  fashion,  a  sign  of  God’s  unity;  to  cause  wisely  and  mercifully  particles  of 
food  to  hasten  to  the  aid  of  the  cells  of  the  body,  plants  to  rush  to the assistance of 
animals, and all mothers to go swiftly to the help of their powerless infants; to work on 
all  things,  particular  and  universal,  from  the  Milky  Way,  the  solar  system  and  the 
elements of the earth, down to the veils of the pupil of the eye, the petals of the rose, 
the husk of the corn, the seeds of the melon, like a series of intersecting circles, with 
the same regularity, perfection of artistry, the same deed, and plenitude of wisdom — 
to do all this establishes the following with self-evident certainty: 

He  who  performs  these  deeds  is One and unique; His imprint is on all things. In 
the same way that He is not in any place, he is present in every place. Like the sun, all 
things are distant from Him, but He is close to all things. Just as the greatest objects, 
such as the Milky Way and the solar system, are not difficult for Him, so too the cells 
in man’s blood and the thoughts that pass across his heart are not secret from Him nor 
beyond the reach of His power. 

However  great  and  multitudinous  a  thing  may  be,  it  is  as  easy  for  Him  as  the 
smallest and scarcest thing, for He creates with ease a fly on the model of an eagle, a 
seed in the form of a tree, a tree in the shape of a garden, a garden with the artistry of 
a  spring,  and  a  spring  on  the  scale  of  a  resurrection.  Things  most  valuable  in  their 
artistry He gives to us and bestows upon us most cheaply. The price that He asks of us 
is merely to  

 

185

say “In the name of God” and “Praise be to God.” In other words, the accepted price 
for all those numerous precious bounties is to say at the beginning of all things, “In the 
Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate,” and at their end, “Praise be to God.” 
Since this Fourth Truth is explained and proved elsewhere in the Risale-i Nur, we 

content ourselves here with this brief allusion. 

THE  FIFTH  TRUTH  perceived  by  our  traveller  at  the  second  stage:  the 
existence in the entirety of the cosmos, its pillars and parts and all the beings contained 
in  it,  of  the  most  perfect  order  and  regularity;  the  sameness  of  the  substances  and 
purposive  beings  that  are  the  means  of  the  rotation  and  administration  of  that  vast 
kingdom and are connected to its general scheme; the fact that the Divine Names and 
deeds  that  are  at  work  in  that  magnificent  city,  that  vast  exhibition,  encompass  and 
comprehend all things or most things, despite their being one within the other, and of 
the same nature, and the same, and their being the same Name and deed in every place; 
the  fact  that  the  elements  and  species  that  are  the  means  for  the  administration, 
inhabiting,  and  construction  of  that  well-adorned  palace, cover the whole face of  the 
earth  in  their  diffusion,  despite  their  being  one  within  the  other,  of  the  same  nature, 
and  the  same  element  and  the  same  species  being  found  everywhere  —  all  of  this 
demands, proves, and affirms, necessarily and self-evidently, the following: 

The Maker and Disposer of this cosmos, the Monarch and Nurturer of this realm, 
the Master and Builder of this palace, is one, unique, sole. He has neither like nor peer, 
neither minister nor aide. He has neither partner nor opposite, he has neither inability 
nor deficiency. Yes, order is in itself a perfect expression of unity; it demands a single 
orderer. It leaves no place for the assignment of partners to God, the source of dispute 
and dissension. 

There  is  a  wise  and  precise  order  inherent  in  all  things,  whether  universal  or 
particular, from the total scheme of the cosmos and the daily and annual rotation of the 
earth down to the physiognomy of man, the complex of senses in man’s head and the 
circulation of white and red cells in man’s blood. Nothing other than One Absolutely 
Powerful  and  Absolutely  Wise  can  stretch  out  its  hand  intentionally  and  creatively 
toward any thing, nor interfere with it. On the contrary, all things are recipients, means 
of manifestation, and passive. 

Now, ordering, the pursuit of certain purposes and the bestowal of regularity with 
a view to certain benefits, can be done only by means of knowledge and wisdom and 
performed only with will and choice. 

 

186

Certainly and  in all events, this wisdom-nurturing regularity, this infinitely varied 
ordering of the cosmos that before our very eyes assures various benefits, proves and 
affirms to a self-evident degree that the Creator and Disposer of all beings is one, an 
agent  possessing  will  and  choice.  Everything  comes  into  being  through  His  power, 
assumes a particular state through His will, and takes on a particular form through His 
choice. 

The heat-giving lamp of this hospice that is the world is one; its candle that is the 
basis for the reckoning of time is one; its merciful sponge is one; its fiery cook is one; 
its life-giving beverage is one; its well-guarded field is one, as well as a thousand and 
one  other  instances  of  oneness.  It  follows  from  all of these instances of oneness that 
the  Maker  and  Master of this hospice is also one, that He is extremely generous and 
hospitable,  for  He  employs  numerous  high-ranking  and  great  officials  to  serve  the 
animate guests of His hospice. 

Names  such  as  All-Wise,  Compassionate,  Giver  of  Forms,  Disposer,  Quickener, 
and  Nurturer,  the  impresses  and  manifestations  of  which  are  to  be  seen  at  work  in 
every corner of the world, attributes such as wisdom, mercy, and grace, and acts such 
as  formation,  disposition and  nurturing,  are  all  one. They embrace every place in the 
utmost degree, each Name and act being present there. 

They also complement the imprint of each other in such a way that it is as if those 
Names  and  deeds  were  uniting  in  such  fashion  that  power  becomes  identical  with 
wisdom and mercy, and wisdom becomes identical with grace and life. For example, as 
soon  as  the  activity  of  the  Name  of  Quickener  appears  in  a  thing,  the  activity  of 
numerous other Names such as Creator, Giver of Form, and Provider, also appears at 
the  same  instant,  everywhere,  and  in  the  same  system.  This  of  a  certainty  and  self-
evidently  establishes  and  proves  that  that  which  is  designated  by  the  Names  and the 
Doer  of  the  comprehensive  deeds  that  appear  everywhere  in  the  same  fashion  must 
also be one, single and unique. In this we believe and to this we give our assent! 

The elements that are the substance and material of creation encompass the whole 
earth.  Each  of  the  species  of  creation  that bears an imprint attesting unity is diffused 
throughout  the  earth  in  unity  and,  so  to  speak,  conquers  it.  This  also  proves  to  the 
degree of being self-evident that those elements together with what they embrace, and 
those species, together with their separate members, are the product and property of a 
single being. They are the products and servants of so Unique and Powerful a One that 
He  employs  those  vast  and  and  imperious  elements  as  obedient  servants  and  those 
species diffused throughout the earth as well- 

 

187

disciplined  soldiers.  Since  this  truth  also  has  been  established  and  explained  in  other 
places in the Risale-i Nur, we content ourselves here with this brief indication. 

In summary of the witnessings that he derived from these Five Truths, through the 
superabundance of faith and the joy of Divine unity, and in expression of his feelings, 
our traveller said to his heart: 

Look upon the coloured page of the cosmic book; 
See what forms the golden pen of power has traced. 
No dark point remains for the gaze of the heart’s eye; 
It is as if God has inscribed His signs with light. 

Know too that: 

The leaves in the world’s book are dimensions infinite;  
The lines of time’s events are works innumerable. 
Written on the workbench of the Preserved Tablet of reality, 
A meaningful embodied word, is every being in this world. 

Listen also to this: 

When  all  things  proclaim,  “No  god  but  God,”  they  will  in  unison  say,  “O 
Truth  and  Reality!”  and  beseech  in  harmony,  “O  Living  One!”  Yes,  in  all 
things there is a sign pointing to the fact that He is One. 

Hearkening  to  this  his  heart  and  soul affirmed the truth of what they heard and said, 
“Yes, indeed!” 

In brief allusion to the Five Truths of Unity observed by our traveller through the 
world, our voyager through the cosmos, at this Second Stopping-Place, it was said in 
the Second Chapter of the First Station: 

There  is  no  god  but  God,  the  One,  the  Unique,  to  Whose  Unity  in  Necessary 
Existence  points  the  witnessing  of  the  truth  of  Grandeur  and  Sublimity,  its 
perfection and comprehensiveness; the witnessing of the truth of the appearance 
of  deeds  in  absolute  fashion,  in infinitude, without any limitation except that of 
God’s  will  and  wisdom;  the  witnessing  of  the  truth  of  the  creation  of  beings  in 
absolute multiplicity with absolute swiftness, the creation of creatures in absolute 
ease  with  absolute  perfection,  the  origination  of  things  made  in  absolute 
plenitude with utter perfection of artistry and value; the witnessing of the truth of 
the  existence  of  beings  in  universal  and  comprehensive  fashion,  joined, 
interconnected and interrelated; the witnessing of the truth of universal order, an 
order incompatible with the assignation of partners to God; the witnessing of the 
unity of the sources of cosmic order, a unity that clearly attests the unity of their 
Maker;  the  unity  of  the  Names  and  deeds  that  comprehend  and  permeate  the 
universe; and the  

 

188

unity  of  the  elements  and  species  dispersed  over  the  face  of  the  earth  in 
imperious fashion. 

That world traveller voyaging through different ages chanced upon the school of 
the  Renewer  of  the  Second  Millenium,  Imam-i  Rabbani,  Ahmad  Faruqi.  He  entered 
and listened to the lesson being taught by the Imam: 

“The  most  important  result  yielded  by  all  the  Sufi  paths  is  the  unfolding  of  the 
truths  of  belief.  The  unfolding  in  clarity  of  a  single  truth  of  belief  is  preferable  to  a 
thousand miraculous deeds and mystical visions.” 

The Imam said too: 
“In  former  times,  great  persons  said  that  someone  will  arise  from  among  the 
theologians and the scholars of the science of theology. He will prove all the truths of 
belief and Islam with rational proofs and the utmost clarity. I wish to be that man and 
maybe I am.”40 

He continued his instruction by saying that belief and the assertion of Divine unity 
were the foundation, substance, light and life of all human perfection; that the Hadith 
“An hour’s reflective thought is better than a year’s worship”41 refers to reflection on 
belief;  and  that  the  silent  mode  of  invocation  practised  in  the  Naqshbandi  Order  is  a 
form of this most excellent reflection. 

The  traveller  listened  with  utmost  care.  He  turned  and  addressed  himself  as 
follows:  “It  is  thus  that  this  heroic  Imam  speaks.  To  increase  the  strength  of  one’s 
belief  by  as  much  as  an  atom  is  worth  more  than  a  ton  of  gnosis  or  other  form  of 
perfection and sweeter than the honey of a hundred visionary experiences. 

“On  the  other  hand,  the  philosophers  of  Europe  have  leagued  together  for  a 
thousand  years  to  invent  objections  and  doubts  in  their  hostility  to  faith  and  the 
Qur’an, and to attack the believers. They wish to shake the pillars of belief that are the 
key,  the  source,  the  foundation  of  everlasting  felicity,  of  life  immortal,  of  eternal 
Paradise. We ought therefore to strengthen our belief by making  it one of realization 
instead of one of imitation. So come, let us advance! In order to bring the twenty-nine 
degrees  of  faith  that  we  have  found,  each  as  powerful  as  a  mountain,  to  the  blessed 
number of thirty-three, the number of litanies that follow upon  

                                             

40 Time has proven that the man referred to here is not in fact an individual, but the Risale-i Nur 

itself. It maybe that the people of unveiling happened to notice the insignificant interpreter and 
proclaimer of the Risale-i Nur and hence came to speak of “a man.” 

41 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 310. 

 

189

prayer,  and  in  order  to  see  a  third  stopping-place  in  this  realm  of  instruction,  let  us 
knock at the door of the dominical sustenance of the animate world and open it with 
the key of ‘In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.’” Speaking thus he 
beseechingly  knocked  at  the  gate  of  this  Third  Stopping-Place,  a  compendium  of 
wonders, and a spectacle of marvels. 

Saying,  “In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Opener,”  he  opened  the  gate.  The  Third 
Stopping-Place  became  visible  to  him.  He  entered  and  saw  that  it  was  illumined  by 
four  great  and  encompassing  truths  that demonstrated  the Divine unity as brightly as 
the sun. 

THE FIRST TRUTH: the Truth of Opening 

That is, the opening up from a single simple substance of innumerable varied and 
separate forms, together, everywhere, in a single instant and by a single deed, through 
the manifestation of the Name of Opener. 
Yes,  in  the  same  way  that  God’s  creative  power  has  opened  up  innumerable  beings 
like flowers in the garden of the cosmos, and endowed each with an orderly form and 
distinct identity, through the manifestation of the Name of Opener, so too, although in 
more miraculous fashion, he has given to the four hundred thousand species of animate 
beings in the garden of the earth each its symmetrical, adorned and distinct form. 

He  creates  you  in  the  wombs  of  your  mothers,  creation  after  creation  in 
three darknesses. That is God, your Sustainer. His is the sovereignty; there is 
no god other than He. Where, then, will you turn?42 

Nought  is  hidden  from  God,  neither  on  earth  nor  in  the  heavens.  He  it  is 
Who forms you in the wombs as He wills; there is no god but He, the Mighty, 
the Wise.43 

As  these  two  verses  indicate,  the  strongest  proof  of  Divine  unity  and  the  most 
remarkable  miracle  of  Divine  Power  is  God’s  opening  up  of  forms.  Because  the 
opening of forms is repeatedly established and expounded in different ways elsewhere 
in  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  particularly  in  the  Sixth  and  Seventh  Degrees  of  the  First 
Chapter of the Second Station of this treatise, we refer the discussion of this matter to 
those places and restrict ourselves here to the following: 
According to the testimony of botany and biology, based on profound research, there 
is in the opening and unfolding of forms, such comprehen 

                                             

42 Qur’an, 39:6. 
43 Qur’an, 3:5-6. 

 

190

siveness  and  artistry  that  other  than  a  Single  and  Unique  One,  One  Absolutely 
Powerful,  able  to  see  and  do  all  things  in  all  things,  no  one  could  undertake  this 
comprehensive  and  all-embracing  deed.  For  this  deed  of  the  unfolding  of  forms 
demands a wisdom, an attention and a comprehensiveness that are present at all times 
and are contained  within an infinite power.  This power, in turn,  can be found only in 
that Unique Being Who administers the whole cosmos. 

As is decreed in the above-quoted verses, God’s attribute of ‘opening’ expressed 
in  the  opening  and  creation  of  the  forms  of  men  from  their  mother’s  wombs,  within 
three  darknesses,  separately,  with  equilibrium,  distinctness,  and  order,  without  any 
error,  confusion,  or  mistake;  this  truth  of  the  unfolding  of  the  forms  of  all  men  and 
animals,  all  over  the  earth,  with  the  same  power,  the  same  wisdom  and  the  same 
artistry, is a most powerful proof of God’s unity. For to comprehend and embrace all 
things  is  itself  a  form  of  unity  that  leaves  no  room  for  the  assignation  of partners  to 
God. Just as the nineteen Truths of the First Chapter bearing witness to the necessary 
existence of God also attest the existence of the Creator through their own existence, 
so  too  they  bear  witness  to  His unity through their comprehensiveness. Our traveller 
then saw the following  Second Truth in the Third Stopping-Place: 

THE SECOND TRUTH: the Truth of Mercifulness 

We see with our own eyes that there is one who has covered the face of the earth 
with thousands of gifts  of mercy, and made it into a feasting-place. He has laid out a 
spread of hundreds of thousands of the different delicious foods of Mercifulness, and 
made the inside of the earth a storehouse containing thousands of precious bounties of 
compassionateness  and  wisdom.  That  Being  sends  to  us  also  the  earth,  in  its  yearly 
rotation,  like  a  ship  or  a  train,  laden  with  the  finest  of  the  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
vital human necessities, proceeding from the World of the Unseen; and He sends to us 
too the spring, like a waggon carrying food and clothing for us. Thus does he nurture 
us, with utmost compassion. In order for us to profit from those gifts and bounties, He 
has  moreover  given  us  hundreds  and  thousands  of  appetities,  needs,  feelings, 
sensations and senses.  

As was set forth in the Fourth Ray concerning the verse on the sufficiency of God, 

He has given us a stomach that can take pleasure in infinite varieties of food.  

He  has  given  us  such  a  life  that  through  the  senses  associated  with  it  we  can 
derive  benefit from the  innumerable bounties of the vast corporeal world, just as if it 
were some bounteous spread. 

 

191

He has favoured us with the human state so that we delight in the boundless gifts 
of both the spiritual and material worlds, through instruments such as the intellect and 
the heart. 

He has conveyed Islam to us so that we derive light from the boundless treasuries 

of the Unseen and Manifest Realms. 

He  has  guided  us to faith so that we are illumined by the innumerable lights and 
gifts  of  this  world  and  the  hereafter.  This  cosmos  is  like  a  palace  fitted  out  and 
adorned by the Divine quality of mercy with innumerable antiques and valuable items, 
which then gives to man’s hands the keys to open all the chests and chambers in that 
palace, as well as bestowing on man’s nature all the needs and senses that will enable 
him to make use of them. 

This  mercy  that  embraces  this  world  and  the  hereafter,  and  indeed  all  things,  is 

without doubt a manifestation of oneness within unity. 

Just  as  the  light  of  the  sun  is  a  parable  of  unity,  through  its  comprehending  all 
things that face it, every bright and transparent object that receives the reflection of the 
light,  heat,  and  seven  colours  of  the  sun,  is  also  a  parable  and  a  symbol  of  oneness. 
Hence, whoever sees its all-embracing light will conclude that the sun of this earth is 
one and unique.  Witnessing the warm and luminous reflection of the sun in all bright 
objects, and even in drops of water, he will say that the oneness of the sun, or the sun 
itself, is present with its attributes close to all things; it is at the mirrorlike heart of all 
things. 

So too the encompassing of all things by the extensive mercy of the Merciful One 
of Beauty, like a light, demonstrates the unity of that Merciful One and that He in no 
way has any partner. Similarly, the fact that under the veil of that all-embracing mercy 
the  lights  of  most  of  the  Merciful  One’s  Names  and  a  sort  of  manifestation  of  His 
essence  are  found  in  everything,  and  especially  in  all  living  beings,  and  in  man  in 
particular, and the fact that this gives each individual a comprehensiveness arising from 
life  which  causes  him  to  look  to  and  be  related  to  the  whole  universe,  proves  the 
oneness of the Merciful One and that He is present with all things and does all things 
in all things. 

Yes,  the  Merciful  One  shows  the  splendour  of  His  glory  in  the  whole  of  the 
cosmos and all over the earth through the unity and comprehensiveness of His mercy. 
With  the  manifestation  of  His  oneness,  He  gathers  together  in  every  member  of  all 
animate  species, and particularly man, specimens of all His bounties, orders the tools 
and instruments of animate beings, and proclaims the special solicitude of His beauty 
to each individual, this without shattering the wholeness of the universe. As for man, it  

 

192

is in him that God makes known in concentrated form the various forms of His bounty. 
Similarly, a melon can be said to be concentrated in its seed; the being that makes 
the seed must necessarily be he who makes the melon. Then, with the special balance 
of his knowledge and the particular law of his wisdom, he draws the seed out from it, 
gathers  it  together  and  clothes  it  in  a  body.  Nothing  other  than  the  one  and  unique 
master  craftsman  who  makes  the  melon  is  able  to  make  its  seed.  That  would  be 
impossible. 

Since through the manifestation of Mercifulness the cosmos becomes like a tree or 
a garden, the earth becomes like a fruit or a melon, and man becomes like a seed, of a 
certainty the Creator and Sustainer of the smallest animate being must be the Creator 
of all the earth and all the cosmos. 

In Short: just as the making and unfolding from a simple substance of the regular 
and orderly forms of all beings through the truth of Opening, which is comprehensive, 
proves unity to the point of being self-evident, so too the truth of Mercifulness, which 
encompasses  all  things,  through  its  nurturing  of  all  animate  beings  that  come  into 
existence  and  enter  the  life  of  this  world,  particularly  the  newly  arrived,  with  the 
utmost  order  and  regularity,  causing  all  necessities  to  reach them, forgetting none of 
them,  this  same  mercy  reaching  all  individuals  everywhere  at  the  same  instant 
demonstrates both unity, and oneness within unity.  

Since the Risale-i Nur is a manifestation of the name of All-Wise and the name of 
Compassionate, and the various points and manifestations of the essence of mercy are 
explained and established in numerous places throughout the Risale-i Nur, we will be 
content here with this indication of a drop from the ocean, and cut short an extremely 
long story. 

Our  traveller  then  witnessed  the  following  Third  Truth  in  the  Third  Stopping-

Place 

THE THIRD TRUTH: the Truth of Disposing and Administering 

That is, to administer with complete order and equilibrium both the awesome and 
swift-moving  heavenly  bodies  and  imperious,  interfering  elements,  and  the  needy, 
weak  denizens  of  earth;  to  cause  them  to  aid  each  other;  to  administer  them  jointly 
with each other; to take all necessary measures concerning them; and to make this vast 
world like a perfect kingdom, a magnificent city, a well-adorned palace. 

Leaving side the vast spheres of this imperious and merciful administration, since 
it is explained and proved in important sections of the Risale-i Nur such as the Tenth 
Word,  we  will  show,  by  means  of  a  comparison,  a  single  page  and  stage  of  that 
administration as it manifests itself in the spring on the face of the earth. 

Let us suppose, for example, that some wondrous world conqueror assembled an 
army from four hundred thousand different groups and nationalities, and supplied the 
clothes  and  weapons,  the  instructions  and  dismissals  and  salaries  of  every  group and 
nationality, separately and variously, without any defect or shortcoming, without error 
or mistake, at the  

 

193

proper  time,  without  any  delay  or  confusion,  with  the  utmost  regularity  and  in  most 
perfect  form,  no  cause  other  than  the  extraordinary  power  of  that  wondrous 
commander could stretch out is hand to attempt that vast, complex, subtle, balanced, 
multitudinous and just administration. Were it to stretch out its hand, it would destroy 
the equilibrium and cause confusion. 

 So  too  we  see  with  our  own  eyes  that  an  unseen  hand  creates  and  administers 
every spring a magnificent army composed of four hundred thousand different species. 
In  the  autumn  —an  example  of  the  day  of  resurrection—  it  dismisses  three  hundred 
thousand out of those four hundred thousand species of plants and animals from their 
duties, and they go on leave through the activity of death and in the name of decease.. 
In  spring  —a  sample  of  the  gathering  that  follows  resurrection—  it  constructs 
three hundred thousand examples of raising from the dead in the space of a few weeks, 
with  the  utmost  order  and  discipline.  In  the  case  of  the  tree,  four  such  resurrections 
take  place  with  respect  to  the  tree  itself,  its  leaves,  its  flowers,  and  its  fruits.  After 
showing  spring  to  our  eyes  exactly  like  the  preceding  one,  it  gives  each  species  and 
group  in  that  army  of  glory  that  contains  four hundred  thousand  different  species its 
appropriate sustenance and provision, its defensive weapons and distinctive garments, 
its  orders  and  dismissals,  and  all  the  tools  and  instruments  it  needs,  with  the  utmost 
order  and  regularity,  without  error  or  slip,  without  confusion  or  omission,  in 
unexpected  fashion  and  at  the  proper  time.  It  thus  proves  its  unity,  oneness, 
uniqueness, and infinite power and boundless mercy within perfection of dominicality, 
sovereignty  and  wisdom,  and  writes  with  the  pen  of  Divine  Determining  this 
proclamation of Divine unity on the face of the earth, on the page of every spring. 

After reading only a single page of this proclamation of one spring, our traveller 

said to himself: 

“The  torment  of  Hell-fire  is  pure  justice  for  those  who  commit  the  error  of 
denying resurrection. For such denial would be to refute the numerous promises and to 
deny the power of One Powerful and Compelling, a Wrathful One of Glory, Who has 
promised and assured all of His prophets thousands of times and set forth in thousands 
of  verses  of  the  Qur’an,  explicity  and  by  way  of  allusion,  that  He  will  bring  about  a 
resurrection  and  gathering  far  easier  for  Him  than  the  thousands  of  miraculous 
gatherings that occur every spring, each more wondrous than the Supreme Gathering.” 
His soul responded: “We believe in what you say.” 

 

194

THE FOURTH TRUTH, which forms the Thirty-Third Degree:  
the Truth of Compassionateness and Bestowal of Provision 

That is,  the giving,  over  the  whole  face  of  the  globe,  within  the earth, in the air 
above it and the ocean around it, to all animate beings, especially those endowed with 
spirit,  and  among  them  especially  the  impotent,  the  weak  and  the  young,  all of  their 
necessary sustenance, material and immaterial, in the most solicitous manner, deriving 
it from dry and rude soil, from solid, bonelike dry pieces of wood, and in the case of 
the  most  delicate  of  all  forms  of  sustenance,  from  between  blood  and  urine,  at  the 
proper  time,  in  orderly  fashion,  without  any  omission  or  confusion,  in  front  of  our 
eyes, by an unseen hand. 
Yes, the verse, 
God is the Provider, the firm possessor of strength,44 
restricts to God the task of sustaining and providing, and the verse, 
There is no moving thing on earth but depends on God for its sustenance; He knows 
its resting-place and storage-place; all is in a book perspicuous45 
provides  a  dominical  guarantee  and  pledge  to  furnish  provision  for  all  men  and 
animals. Similarly, the verse, 
The beasts do not carry their sustenance; God sustains them and you, and He is All-
Hearing, All-Knowing,46 
establishes and proclaims that it is God Who guarantees and provides for all impotent, 
powerless,  weak  and  wretched  creatures  that  are  unable  to  secure  their  own 
sustenance, in an unexpected fashion, indeed from the Unseen or even out of nothing; 
it is He for example Who provides for insects on the ocean bed and their young. This 
proclamation  is  directed  in  particular  to  those  men  who  worship  causes  and  are 
unaware  that  it  is  He  Who  bestows  provision  from  behind  the  veil  of  causality. 
Numerous  other  verses  of  the  Qur’an  and  innumerable  pieces  of  cosmic  evidence 
unanimously  demonstrate  that  it  is  the  compassionateness  of  a  single  Glorious 
Provider that nurtures all animate beings. 
Now  the  trees  require  a  certain  form  of  sustenance  but  have  neither  power  nor  will. 
They  remain  therefore  in  their  places,  trusting  in  God,  and  their  provision  comes 
hastening  to  them.  So  too  the  sustenance  of  infants  flows  to  their  mouths  from 
wondrous small pumps, aided by the solici 

                                             

44 Qur’an, 3:5-6. 
45 Qur’an, 11:6. 
46 Qur’an, 29:60. 

 

195

tude and tenderness of their mothers. Then when the infants acquire a little power and 
will, the milk ceases. These various instances clearly prove that licit sustenance is not 
proportionate  to  will  and  power,  but  comes  in  relation  to  weakness  and  impotence, 
which induce trust in God. 

Will, power and cleverness frequently incite greed, which is a source of loss, and 
often  push  certain  learned  men  toward  a  form  of  beggary,  whereas  by  contrast  the 
trusting  weakness  of  the  boorish,  crude  and  common  man  may  cause  him  to  attain 
riches. 

The  proverb,  “How  many  a  learned  man  has  striven  in  vain,  and  how  many  an 
ignoramus gained rich provision,” establishes that licit provision is not won by power 
and will, but by a mercy that finds working and striving acceptable; it is bestowed by a 
tenderness that takes pity on need. 

Now provision and sustenance is of two kinds: 
The First is true and natural provision, that required for life; this is guaranteed by 
the  Sustainer.  It  is  indeed  so  regular  and  well-ordered  that  this  natural  provision, 
stored in the body in the form of fat and other things, is enough to ensure survival for 
at  least  twenty  days,  even  if  nothing  is  eaten.  Those  who  apparently  die  of  hunger 
before the twenty or thirty days are up and before the provision stored up in their body 
is exhausted, die in reality not from a lack of provision, but from a disease arising from 
lack of caution and the disturbance of fixed habit. 

The Second Form of Provision: metaphorical and artifical provision, arising due 
to  addiction  from  habit,  wastefulness  and  misuse,  but  acquiring  the  appearance  of 
necessity. This form is not guaranteed by the Sustainer, but depends on His generosity: 
sometimes He may give it, sometimes He may not give it. 

With  respect  to  this  second  form  of  provision  and  sustenance,  happy  is  he  who 
regards  his  frugality  —a  source  of  happiness  and  pleasure—  contentment  and  licit 
striving,  as  a  form  of  worship  and  active  prayer  for  sustenance.  He  accepts  God’s 
bounty gratefully and appreciatively, and passes his life in happpy fashion. 

Wretched is he  who on account of prodigality —the source of wretchedness and 
loss— and greed, abandons licit striving, knocks at every door, passes his life in sloth, 
oppression and wretchedness, and indeed puts his own life to death. 

In the same way that a stomach requires sustenance, so too the subtle capacities 
and senses of man, his heart, spirit, intelligence, eye, ear and mouth, also request their 
sustenance from the Compassionate Provider and gratefully receive it. To each of them 
separately and in appropriate  

 

196

form  is  presented such provision from the treasury  of mercy as will rejoice them and 
give  them  pleasure.  Indeed,  the  Compassionate  Provider,  in  order  to  give  to  them 
provision in more generous measure has created each of man’s subtle capacities —eye 
and  ear,  heart,  imagination,  and  intellect—  in  the  form  of  a  key  to  His  treasury  of 
mercy. For example, the eye is a key to the treasury containing such precious jewels as 
the fairness and beauty to be seen on the face of the universe, and the same holds true 
of  all  the  others  mentioned;  they  all  benefit  through  faith.  To  resume  after  our 
digression: 

The  All-Powerful  and  Wise  One  Who  created  this  cosmos  created  also  life  as  a 
comprehensive summary of the cosmos, and concentrated all of His purposes and the 
manifestations  of  His  Names  therein.  So  too,  within  the  realm  of  life,  he  made  of 
provision  a  comprehensive  centre  of  activity  and  created  within  animate  beings  the 
taste  for  provision,  thus  causing  animate  beings  to  respond  to  His  dominicality  and 
love with a permanent and universal gratitude, thankfulness, and worship that is one of 
the  significant  purposes  and  instances  of  wisdom  inherent  in  the  creation  of  the 
universe. 

For example, it is one of the activities of dominicality to cause  every area of the 
broad  realm  of  dominicality  to  rejoice  —  the  heavens  are  caused  to  rejoice  with  the 
angels and spirit beings, the World of the Unseen with spirits, and the material world, 
particularly the air and the earth, with the existence of all animate beings, particularly 
birds, great and small, at all times and places. Through the wisdom of this causing to 
rejoice and the infusion of life and spirit, animals and men are, as it were, whipped by 
the need for provision and the pleasure they take therein to pursue their provision and 
sustenance,  thus  being  delivered  from  sloth.  This  too  is  one  of  the  wise  activities  of 
dominicality.  Were  it  not  for  such  significant  instances  of  wisdom,  the  provision 
destined  for  animals  would  be  caused  instinctively  to  hasten  toward  them  to  satisfy 
their needs, without any effort on their part, just as provision and sustenance is caused 
to hasten toward the tree. 

Were  there  to  be  an  eye  capable  of  witnessing  and  comprehending  the  whole 
surface  of  the  earth  at  one  time,  in  order  to  perceive  the  beauties  of  the  Names  of 
Compassionate  and  Provider  and  the  witness  they  bear  to  Divine  unity,  it  would  see 
what  sweet  beauty  is  contained  in  the  tender  and  solicitous  manifestation  of  the 
Compassionate  Provider  Who  sends  to  the  caravans  of  animals  at  the  end  of  winter, 
when  their  provision  is  about  to  be  exhausted,  extremely  delicious,  abundant  and 
varied foods and bounties, drawn exclusively from His unseen treasury of mercy, as  

 

197

succour  from  the  unseen  and  Divine  generosity,  placed  in  the  hands  of  plants,  the 
crowns of trees, and the breasts of mothers. The possessor of that all-seeing eye would 
realize the following: 

The  making  of  a  single  apple,  and  the  generous  giving  of  it  to  a  man  as  true 
sustenance  and  provision,  can  be  accomplished  only  by  a  Being  Who  causes  the 
seasons,  the  nights  and  the  days  to  rotate,  Who  causes  the  globe  to  revolve  like  a 
cargo ship, and thus brings the fruits of the seasons within reach of those needy guests 
of  the  earth  who  stand  waiting  for  them.  For  the  stamp  of  its  nature,  the  seal  of 
wisdom, the imprint of eternal besoughtedness, the signet of mercy that is to be found 
on the surface of the apple, is to be found also on all apples and other fruits, plants and 
animals.  Hence  the  true  Master  and  Maker  of  the  apple  is  bound  to  be  the  Glorious 
Sovereign,  the  Beauteous  Creator  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world,  who  are  the 
peers, the congeners and the brothers of the apple; of the vast earth that is the garden 
of  the  apple;  of  the  tree  of  the  cosmos  that  is  its  factory;  of the  seasons  that  are  its 
workshop; and of the spring and summer that are its place of maturing. 

In  other  words,  every  fruit  is  a  seal  of  unity  that  makes  known  the  Writer  and 
Maker  of  the  earth,  its  tree,  and  of  the  book  of  the  universe,  its  garden;  it 
demonstrates  His  unity,  and  shows  to  the  number  of  fruits,  the  seal  affixed  to  the 
decree of unity. 

Since the Risale-i Nur is a manifestation of the Names of All-Compassionate and 
All-Wise, and numerous flashes and mysteries of the truth of Compassionateness have 
been  expounded  and  proved  in  many  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  we  leave  further 
discussion of the matter to those parts and content ourselves with this brief indication, 
out  of  a  vast  treasury,  on  account  of the unfavourable circumstances from which we 
are now suffering. 

Our  traveller  now  says:  “Praise  be  to  God!  I  have  seen  and  heard  Thirty-Three 
Truths  bearing  witness  to  the  necessary  existence  and  unity  of  the  Creator  and 
Sovereign I was everywhere seeking and enquiring after. Each of the truths is bright as 
the sun and leaves no darkness behind. It is as strong and unshakeable as a mountain. 
Each of them, with its verifications, bears decisive witness to His existence, and with 
its comprehensiveness proves His unity in manifest fashion. While proving implicitly all 
the  pillars  of  faith,  the  totality  and  consensus  of  these  truths  causes  our  belief  to 
advance from imitation to realization, from realization to knowledge of certainty, from 
knowledge  of certainty to vision of certainty, and from vision of certainty to absolute 
certainty. Praise be to God; this is from the bounty of my Sustainer.” 

 

198

Praise  be  to  God  Who  guided  us  to  this;  verily  we  would  not  have  been 
guided  unless  God had guided us. The messengers of God have come to us 
with the truth.47 

In extremely brief allusion to the lights of belief derived by our inquisitive traveller 
from  the four sublime truths he witnessed at the Third Stopping-Place, it was said in 
the Second Chapter of the First Station, concerning the truths of the Third Stopping-
Place: 

There is no god other than God, the One, the Unique, to Whose Unity 
in Necessary Existence points the witnessing of the sublimity of the 
comprehensiveness of the truth of opening, through the unfolding of 
different forms of four hundred thousand species of living beings, 
perfect and without defect, according to the testimony of biology and 
botany; the witnessing of the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the 
truth of  mercifulness, all-embracing and regular, without any 
deficiency, as the eye can see; the witnessing of the sublimity of the 
truth of administering, that encompasses in orderly fashion all living 
beings, without error or defect; the witnessing of the sublimity of the 
comprehensivness of the truth of compassionateness and sustaining, 
embracing all consumers of sustenance, at every time of need, without 
any mistake or forgetfulness; Glory be unto Him, the Provider, the 
Merciful, the Compassionate, the Solicitous, the Generous; His gifts 
are universal, and His Generosity is all-embracing; there is no god but 
He! 
Glory be unto You; we have no knowledge save that which You have 
taught us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.48 
O our Sustainer! For the sake of ‘In the name of God, the Merciful, the 
Compassionate,’ O God, O Merciful One, O Compassionate One! 
Bestow peace and blessings upon our master Muhammad, his Family 
and all his Companions, to the number of all the letters in the Risale-i 
Nur, multiplied by ten times the number of minutes in all of our lives in 
this world and the hereafter, and then by the number of particles in my 
body throughout the course of my life. Forgive me, and those who aid 
me in sincerity in the copying and distribution of the Risale-i Nur, and 
our fathers, our masters, our shaykhs, our sisters, our brothers, and 
the sincere students of the Risale-i Nur, particularly those who write 
and copy this treatise; by Your Mercy, O Most Merciful of the 
Merciful, Amen. The conclusion of our prayer is, ‘Praise be to God, 
the Sustainer of All The Worlds!’ 

                                             

47 Qur’an, 7:43. 
48 Qur’an, 2:32. 

 

199

NOTE 
 

Since the other parts of the Risale-i Nur were not available in the place that saw 
the composition of the foregoing treatise, which was of necessity written down here, 
certain important matters of The Words and The Flashes have been mentioned also in 
The Supreme Sign, in what is an apparent repetition. In order to have the students of 
the  Risale-i  Nur  in  this  area  write  a  complete  Risale-i  Nur  in  miniature,  we 
nonetheless had them write down all the present treatise. 

The revised copy of this rough draft was written by a certain blessed person. Even 
though he was ignorant of such matters, we saw in the copy prepared by him a subtle 
and  profound  correspondence  of  the  letters:  there  were  six  hundred  and  sixty-six 
alifs49 written at the beginning of the lines in his copy. This number corresponds fully 
with the value according to the abjad of the title given to this treatise by Imam ‘Ali 
(May  God  be  pleased  with  him),  Ayat  al-Kubra  (The  Supreme  Sign),  and  thus 
demonstrates  the  suitability  of  this  title  for  the  treatise.  We  also  understood  this 
numerical correspondence to be an indication that this treatise is a flash derived from 
the light of the verses of the Qur’an for they are six thousand six hundred and sixty-
six in number. 

                                                                                 S a i d   N u r s i 

                                             

of which is one. [Tr.] 

49 Alif: the first letter of the Arabic alphabet, written as a vertical stroke, and the numerical value 

 

200

ON THE PURPOSE OF 
THE RISALE-I NUR 

Today,  I  listened  to  an  imaginary  exchange  of  question  and  answer.  Let  me  set 

forth for you a summary of it. 

Someone said: “The great mobilization and complete preparedness of the Risale-i 
Nur for the sake of belief and the proving of the Divine unity is constantly increasing. 
One hundredth part of its contents is enough to silence the most obstinate atheist; why 
then this further feverish mobilization and preparation?” 

They answered  him: “The Risale-i Nur is not only repairing some minor damage 
or  some  small  house;  it  is  repairing  vast  damage  and  the  all-embracing citadel which 
contains Islam, the stones of which are the size of mountains. And it is not striving to 
reform only a private heart and an individual  conscience; it is striving to cure with the 
medicines  of  the  Qur’an  and  belief  and  the  Qur’an’s  miraculousness  the  collective 
heart  and  generally-held  ideas,  which  have  been  breached  in awesome fashion by  the 
tools  of  corruption  prepared  and  stored  up  over  a  thousand  years,  and  the  general 
conscience,  which  is  facing  corruption  through  the  destruction  of  the  foundations, 
currents,  and  marks  of  Islam  which  are  the  refuge  of  all and particularly the mass of 
believers. 

“Certainly,  for  such  universal  breaches  and  awesome  wounds,  proofs  and 
equipment  of  the  utmost  certitude  and  the  strength  of  mountains,  and  well-proven 
medicines  and  numberless  drugs  of  the  effectiveness  of  a  thousand  remedies  are 
necessary. Emerging at this time from the miraculousness of the Qur’an of Miraculous 
Exposition, the Risale-i Nur performs this function, and is also the means of advancing 
and progressing through the infinite degrees of belief.” 

A long discussion ensued to which I listened, offering infinite thanks. I curtail the 

matter here. 

                                                                          S a i d   N u r s i 

 

201

The Ninth Ray 

 [The first part of an important addendum to the Tenth Word] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
So  [give]  glory  to  God,  when  you  reach  eventide  and  when  you  rise  in  the 
morning; Yea, to Him be praise, in the heavens and on earth; and in the late 
afternoon and when the day begins to decline. 
It  is  He  Who  brings  out  the  living  from  the  dead,  and  brings  out  the  dead 
from  the  living,  and  Who  gives  life  to  the  earth  after  it  is  dead:  and  thus 
shall you be brought out [from the dead]. 
Among His Signs is this, that He created you from dust; and then,— behold, 
you are men scattered [far and wide]! 
And  among  His  Signs  is  this,  that  He  created  for  you  mates  from  among 
yourselves, that you may dwell in tranquillity with them, and He has put love 
and  mercy  between  your  [hearts]:  verily  in  that  are  Signs  for  those  who 
reflect. 
And  among  His  Signs  is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and  the 
variations  in  your  languages  and  your  colours:  verily  in  that  are  Signs  for 
those who know. 
And among His Signs is the sleep that you take by night and by day, and the 
quest  that  you  [make  for  livelihood]  out  of  His  bounty:  verily  in  that  are 
Signs for those who hearken. 
And among His Signs, He shows you the lightning, by way both of fear and 
of  hope,  and  He  sends  down  rain  from  the  sky  and  with  it  gives  life  to the 
earth after it is dead: verily in that are Signs for those who are wise. 
And among His Signs is this, that heaven and earth stand by His command: 
then when He calls you, by a single call, from the earth,  

 

202

behold, you [straightway] come forth. 
To  Him  belongs  every  being  that  is  in  the  heavens  and  on  earth:  all  are 
devoutly obedient to Him. 
It is He Who begins [the process of] creation; then repeats it; and for Him it 
is most easy. To Him belongs the loftiest similitude [we can think of] in the 
heavens and the earth; for He is Exalted in Might, Full of Wisdom.1  

In  this  Ninth  Ray  will  be  expounded  a  supreme  point  of  these  sublime  heavenly 
verses,  which demonstrate one of the ‘poles’ of belief; these mighty sacred proofs of 
the resurrection of the dead will be explained. It is a subtle instance of dominical grace 
that  thirty  years  ago at the end of his work entitled Muhâkemat (Reasonings), which 
was  written  to  set  out  the  principles  of  Qur’anic  exegesis,  the  Old  Said  wrote: 
“Second  Aim:  Two  Qur’anic  verses  alluding  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  will  be 
expounded  and  explained.  In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Merciful,  the  Compassionate.” 
There  he  stopped  and  could  write  no  further.  Now,  praise  and  thanks  be  to  my 
Compassionate Creator to the number of signs and indications of the resurrection, that 
thirty  years  later  He  gave  me  success.  Yes,  nine  or  ten  years  ago,  He  bestowed the 
Tenth  and  Twenty-Ninth  Words,  two  brilliant  and  powerful  proofs  expounding  the 
Divine decree of: 

So look to the signs of God’s mercy, how He raises to life the earth after its 
death;  He  it  is  who  will  raise  the  dead  to  life,  for  He is Powerful Over All 
Things,2  

which was the first of the two verses. They silenced the deniers of resurrection. Now, 
nine or ten years after those two impregnable bastions of belief in the resurrection of 
the  dead,  He  bestowed  with  the  present  treatise  a  commentary  on  the  second  of the 
above  two  sublime  verses.  This Ninth Ray, then, consists of nine elevated ‘Stations’, 
indicated by the above-mentioned verses, and an important Introduction. 

                                             

1 Qur’an, 30:17-27. 
2 Qur’an, 30:50. 

 

203

Introduction 

[Two Points comprising a concise explanation of one comprehensive result of 
the  numerous  spiritual  benefits  of  belief  in  resurrection  and  of  its  vital 
consequences;  a  demonstration  of  how  essential  it  is  for  human  life  and 
especially  for  the  life  of  society;  a  summary  of  one  universal  proof  out  of 
numerous  proofs  of  the  tenet of belief in the resurrection of the dead; and a 
statement of how indubitable and self-evident is that tenet of belief.] 

FIRST POINT 

We shall indicate, as a measure, only four out of hundreds of proofs that belief in 
the hereafter is fundamental to the life of society and to man’s personal life, and is the 
basis of his happiness, prosperity, and achievement. 

T h e   F i r s t :  It is only with the thought of Paradise that children, who form 
almost a half of mankind, can endure all the deaths around them, which appear to them 
to  be  grievous  and  frightening,  and  strengthen  the  morale  of  their  weak  and  delicate 
beings. With the thought of Paradise they find hope in their vulnerable spirits, prone to 
weeping,  and  may  live  happily.  For  example,  thinking  of  Paradise,  a  child  may  say: 
“My little brother or friend has died and become a bird in Paradise. He is flying around 
Paradise  and  living  more  happily  than  us.”  The  frequent  deaths  before  their  unhappy 
eyes of other children like themselves or of grown-ups will otherwise destroy all their 
resistance  and  morale,  making  their  subtle  faculties,  such  as  their  spirits,  hearts,  and 
minds, weep together with their eyes; they will either decline utterly or become crazy, 
wretched animals. 

S e c o n d   P r o o f :  It is only through the life of the hereafter that the elderly, 
who form half of mankind, can endure the proximity of the grave, and be consoled at 
the  thought  that  their  lives,  to  which  they  are  firmly  attached,  will  soon  be 
extinguished and their fine worlds come to an end. It is only with the hope of eternal 
life that they can respond to the grievous despair they feel in their emotional child-like 
spirits  at  the  thought  of  death.  Those  worthy,  anxious  fathers  and  mothers,  so 
deserving of compassion and in need of tranquillity and peace of mind, will otherwise 
feel a terrible spiritual turmoil and distress in their hearts, and this world will become a 
dark prison for them, and life even, grievous torment.  

 

204

T h i r d  P r o o f : It is only the thought of Hell-fire that checks the turbulent 
emotions of youths, the most vigorous element in the life of society, and their violent 
excesses, restraining them from aggression, oppression, and destruction, and ensuring 
that  the life of society continues tranquilly. If not for fear of Hell, in accordance with 
the rule ‘Might is right,’ in pursuing their desires, those drunken youths would turn the 
worlds of the wretched weak and powerless into Hell, and elevated humanity into base 
animality. 

F o u r t h   P r o o f : The most comprehensive centre of man’s worldly life, and 
its mainspring, and a paradise, refuge, and fortress of worldly happiness, is the life of 
the family. Everyone’s home is a small world for him. And the life and happiness of his 
home  and  family  are  possible  through  genuine,  earnest,  and  loyal  respect  and  true, 
tender, and self-sacrificing compassion. This true respect and genuine kindness may be 
felt due to the idea of the members of the family having an everlasting companionship 
and  friendship  and  togetherness,  and  their  parental,  filial,  brotherly,  and  friendly 
relations continuing for all eternity in a limitless life, and their believing this. One says, 
for  example:  “My  wife  will  be  my  constant  companion  in  an  everlasting  world  and 
eternal life. It does not matter if she is now old and ugly, for she will have an immortal 
beauty.” He will tell himself that he will be as kind and devoted as he can for the sake 
of  that  permanent  companionship,  and  treat  his  elderly  wife  lovingly  and  kindly  as 
though  she  was  a  beautiful  houri.  A  companionship  that  was  to  end  in  eternal 
separation  after  an  hour  or  two  of  brief,  apparent  friendship  would  otherwise  afford 
only  superficial,  temporary,  feigned,  animal-like  feelings,  and  false  compassion  and 
artificial  respect.  As  with  animals,  self-interest  and  other  overpowering  emotions 
would  prevail  over  the  respect  and  compassion,  transforming  that  worldly  paradise 
into Hell. 

Thus, one of the hundreds of results of belief in resurrection is connected with the 
life  of  society.  If  a  comparison  is  made  between  the  above  four  proofs  out  of  the 
hundreds  of  aspects  and  benefits  of  this  single  consequence  and  the  rest,  it  will  be 
understood  that  the  realization  of  the  truth  of  resurrection  and its occurrence, are as 
certain as the elevated reality of humanity and its universal need. It is clearer even than 
the  evidence  for  the  existence  of  food  offered  by  the  existence  of  need  in  man’s 
stomach, and tells of its existence more clearly. It proves too that if the consequences 
of  the  truth  of  resurrection  were  to  quit  humanity,  whose  nature  is  extremely 
significant,  lofty,  and  living,  it  would  descend  to  being  a  corrupt  corpse  fed  on  by 
microbes. 

 

205

The  sociologists,  politicians,  and  moralists  who  govern  mankind  and  are 
concerned  with  its  social  and  moral  questions  should  be  aware of this! How do they 
propose to fill this vacuum? With what can they cure these deep wounds? 

SECOND POINT 

This  explains  in  summary  form  a  proof  —one  of  many—  proceeding  from  the 

testimony to the truth of resurrection of the other pillars of belief. It is as follows: 

All the miracles indicating the messengership of Muhammad (Peace and blessings 
be upon him) and the evidences for his prophethood, and all the proofs of his veracity, 
together  testify  to  the  occurrence  of  the  resurrection  and  prove  it.  For  after  Divine 
unity, everything he claimed throughout his life was centred on the resurrection of the 
dead. Also, all his miracles and proofs affirming, and making affirmed, all the previous 
prophets  attest  to  the  same  truth.  Also,  the  testimony  of  the  phrase  “and  in  His 
Scriptures,”  which  makes  completely  clear  the  testimony  of  the  phrase  “and  in  His 
Prophets,” testifies to the same truth. Like this: 

All the miracles, truths, and proofs proving foremost the veracity of the Qur’an of 
Miraculous  Exposition,  testify  to  and  prove  the  realization  and  occurrence  of 
resurrection.  For  almost  a  third  of  the  Qur’an  is  about  resurrection,  and  at  the 
beginning of most of its short suras are powerful verses about it. It expresses the same 
truth  explicitly  and  implicitly  with  thousands  of  its  verses,  and  proves  and 
demonstrates it. For example: 

When the sun is folded up.3 * O men, fear your Sustainer; the trembling of 
the Hour is an awesome event;4 * When the earth is convulsed;5 * When the 
heavens  are  torn  asunder;6  *  When  the  heavens  are  torn  apart;7  * 
Concerning  what  they  dispute;8  *  Has  the  story  reached  you,  of  the 
overwhelming event?9 

Besides demonstrating with complete certainty at the beginning of thirty or forty 
suras that resurrection is the most important and necessary truth in the universe, it sets 
forth various persuasive evidences for that truth in others of its verses.  

                                             

3 Qur’an, 81:1. 
4 Qur’an, 22:1. 
5 Qur’an, 99:1. 
6 Qur’an, 82:1. 
7 Qur’an, 84:1. 
8 Qur’an, 78:1. 
9 Qur’an, 88:1. 

 

206

Is there any possibility that belief in the hereafter should be false, which emerges 
like  the  sun  from  the  thousands  of  declarations  and  statements  of  a  Book  a  single 
indication  of  one  of  the  verses  of  which  has  yielded  before  our  eyes  the  fruits  of 
numerous learned and cosmic truths in the Islamic sciences? Is there any possibility of 
denying  the  sun,  or  the  existence  of  the  universe?  Would  it  not  be  impossible  and 
absurd?  Is  it  at  all  possible  that  although  an  army  may  sometimes  be  plunged  into 
battle so that a mere sign of the king should not be given the lie, to show as false the 
thousands of words, promises, and threats of that most serious, proud monarch? Is it 
possible that they should be false? 

Although  a  single  sign  of  that  glorious  spiritual  monarch  who  for  thirteen 
centuries  without  break  has  ruled  over  innumerable  spirits,  minds,  hearts,  and  souls 
within  the  bounds  of  truth  and  reality,  and  trained  and  educated  them,  would  be 
sufficient to  prove  the  truth of resurrection, it has demonstrated it with thousands of 
explicit statements. Is the torment of Hell-fire not necessary then for the compounded 
idiot who does not recognize this fact? Is it not pure justice? 

Moreover,  by  their  definite  acceptance  of  the  truth  of  resurrection,  which  the 
Qur’an  —prevailing  over  the  future  and  all  times—  repeatedly  proves  in  detail  and 
elucidates,  all  the  revealed  scriptures  and  sacred  books,  each  of  which  dominated  a 
particular  period,  proved  it  according  to  their  own  times  and  centuries,  but  in 
undetailed,  veiled, and summary manner, confirming with a thousand signatures what 
the Qur’an teaches. 

Included here since it is related to this discussion is the testimony at the end of the 
Third  Ray  of  the  other  pillars  of  faith,  and  particularly  “the  Prophets”  and  “Holy 
Scriptures,”  to  “belief  in  the  Last  Day.”  It  forms  a  convincing  proof  of  resurrection, 
and is in the form of a powerful yet succinct supplication which dispels all doubts. It 
says in the supplication: 

“O My Compassionate Sustainer! 
“I  have  understood  from  the  instruction  of  Your Noble  Messenger  (PBUH)  and 
the  teaching  of  the  Qur’an,  that  foremost  the  Qur’an  and  the  Messenger,  and  all the 
sacred  scriptures  and  prophets,  have  unanimously  testified  and  pointed  out  that  the 
manifestations of the Names related to Your beauty and glory, examples of which are 
to  be  seen  in  this  world,  will  continue  even  more  radiantly  for  all  eternity,  and  that 
Your  bounties,  samples  of  which  are  to  be  observed  in  this  transitory  world,  will 
persist in the abode of bliss in still more glittering fashion, and that those who long for 
them in this world will accompany them for all eternity. 

“Also, relying on hundreds of evident miracles and decisive signs, foremost Your 

Most Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him)  

 

207

and  the  All-Wise  Qur’an,  and  the  prophets  with  their  luminous  spirits,  and  the 
saints, who are spiritual poles with their light-filled hearts, and the purified scholars 
with  their  enlightened  intellects,  relying on  Your repeated threats and promises in all 
the  sacred  scriptures,  and  trusting  in  Your  sacred  attributes  such  as  power,  mercy, 
favour,  wisdom,  glory,  and  beauty,  and  on  Your  qualities,  and  the  dignity  of  Your 
glory,  and  the  sovereignty  of  Your  dominicality,  and  in  consequence  of  their 
illuminations and visions and beliefs at the degree of ‘the knowledge of certainty,’ give 
the glad tidings to men and jinn of eternal happiness  and inform them of Hell for the 
people of misguidance; they firmly believe this and testify to it. 

“O  All-Powerful  and  Wise  One!  O  Most  Merciful  and  Compassionate!  O 
Munificent  One  True  to  His  Promise!  O  All-Compelling  One  of  Glory,  One  of 
Dignity, Grandeur, and Wrath! 

“You  are  utterly  exempt  from  and  exalted  above  giving  the  lie  to  so  many loyal 
friends,  and  so  many  promises,  and  attributes  and  qualities,  and  denying  the  certain 
demands  of  the  sovereignty  of  Your  dominicality  and  the  endless  prayers  and 
supplications  of  Your  innumerable  acceptable  servants,  whom  You  love  and  who 
attract  Your  love  by  assenting  to  You  and  obeying  You;  and  You  are  exempt  from 
confirming the denial of resurrection by the people of misguidance and unbelief, who 
through  their  disbelief  and  rebellion  and  denial  of  Your  promises,  offend  the 
magnificence of Your grandeur and affront Your dignity and glory and the honour of 
Your  Godhead,  and  sadden  the  compassion  of  Your  dominicality.  We  declare  Your 
justice, beauty, and mercy to be exempt from such infinite tyranny, such ugliness. We 
believe with all our strength that the testimony of the prophets, purified scholars, and 
saints, who are  those truthful envoys of Yours, those heralds of Your sovereignty, at 
the  degrees  of  ‘absolute  certainty,’  ‘knowledge  of  certainty,’  and  ‘the  vision  of 
certainty,’  to  the  treasuries  of  Your  mercy  in  the  hereafter  and  the  stores  of  Your 
bounties  in  the  everlasting  realm,  and  to  the  wondrously  beautiful  manifestations  of 
Your  Beautiful  Names,  which  will  be  manifested  totally  in  the  abode  of  bliss,  are 
absolutely true and veracious, and what they have indicated conforms absolutely with 
reality, and that what they have given glad tidings of is true and will occur. Believing 
that the supreme ray of Your Name of Truth, which is the source, sun, and protector 
of  all  realities,  is  this  truth  of  the  resurrection  and  Great  Gathering,  they  teach  it  to 
Your servants.” 

O God! For the sake of what they teach and in veneration of it, grant us and all 
students of the Risale-i Nur perfect belief and a happy death. And allow us to receive 
their intercession. Amen! 

 

208

Moreover,  just  as  all  the  proofs  demonstrating  the  veracity  of  the  revealed 
scriptures,  and  all  the  miracles  and  evidences  proving  the  prophethood  of  God’s 
Beloved  (PBUH) and of all the prophets, indirectly prove the reality of the hereafter, 
which is what they teach above all else; so most of the evidences for the existence and 
unity of the Necessary Existent testify indirectly to the existence and opening up of an 
eternal  realm  of  bliss,  which  will  be  the  supreme  manifestation  of  dominicality  and 
divinity. For as is explained and proved in the following paragraphs, both the existence 
of the Necessarily Existent One, and most of His attributes, qualities and Names, such 
as dominicality, Godhead, mercy, grace, wisdom, and justice, necessitate the hereafter 
with  the  utmost  certainty,  and  demand  an  eternal  realm  and  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead and Last Judgement for the granting of reward and punishment. 

Since  there  is  a  pre-eternal  and  post-eternal  God,  most  certainly  there  is  the 

hereafter, the everlasting sphere of the sovereignty of His Godhead. 

And since there is in the universe and in living beings a most majestic and wise, a 
most compassionate and absolute dominicality, and it is apparent; there is certain to be 
an  eternal  realm  of  happiness  which  will  save  the  majesty  of  that  dominicality  from 
abasement,  its  wisdom  from  purposelessness,  and  its  compassion  from  cruelty;  and 
that realm shall be entered. 

And since the unlimited bestowals, bounties, favours, gifts, and instances of grace 
and  mercy  which  are  to  be  seen,  show  to minds that are not extinguished and hearts 
that  are  not  dead  that  behind  the  veil  of  the  Unseen  is  One  All-Merciful  and 
Compassionate; surely there is an immortal life in an eternal realm which will save the 
bestowal  from  mockery,  the  bounties  from  deception,  the  favours  from  enmity,  the 
mercy  from  torment,  the  grace  and  gifts  from  treachery,  and  will  make  the bounties 
bounty and the bestowal bestowal. 

And  since  in  the  springtime  on  the  narrow  page  of  the  earth,  a  pen  of  power 
writes a hundred thousand books without error tirelessly before our eyes; and since the 
Holder of the pen has promised a hundred thousand times: “I am going to write a fine, 
immortal  book  in  a  broad  realm,  easier  than  this  book  of  the  spring  written  in  this 
narrow realm, confused and intermingled, and I shall allow you to read it;” — since He 
mentions  the  book  in  all  his  decrees;  certainly,  the  main  part  of  the  book  has  been 
written, and with the resurrection and Last Judgement its footnotes shall be added, and 
all the notebooks of people’s actions shall be recorded in it. 

And  since,  with  its  multiplicity  of  creatures,  the  earth  is  the  dwelling,  source, 
factory,  exhibition,  and  gathering  place  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  constantly 
changing species of living beings and beings with spirits,  

 

209

and  is  the  heart,  centre,  summary,  and  result  of  the  universe,  and  the  reason  for  its 
creation; it has supreme importance, and is held equal to the mighty heavens despite its 
smallness;  in  the  heavenly  decrees,  it  is  always  said:  Sustainer  of  the  Heavens  and 
Earth... 

And since there is man, who rules over the earth, which is thus, has disposal over 
most  creatures,  and  subjects  most  living  beings  gathering  them  around  himself;  and 
since he so orders, displays, and gathers each remarkable species together in one place 
like a list, adorning them, that he attracts not only the attention and admiration of men 
and jinn, but of the dwellers of the heavens and the universe, and the appreciative gaze 
of  the universe’s Owner, thus gaining great importance and high worth; and since he 
shows through his sciences and arts that he is the purpose of the universe’s creation, 
and  its  most  important  result,  and  most  precious  fruit,  and  the  Divine  vicegerent  on 
earth;  and  since  because  with  respect  to  this  world,  he  has  ordered  and  displayed 
excellently the miraculous arts of the world’s Maker, he is left in this world despite his 
rebellion and disbelief, and his punishment is postponed, and because of this work of 
his, his term is prolonged and is allowed success... 

And since there is an extremely powerful, wise, and compassionate Disposer Who 
makes  the  mighty  globe  into  a  treasury  of  every  sort  of  metal  and  mineral  that  man 
needs  in  a  way  entirely  beyond  his  strength  and  will  —who  despite  being  weak, 
impotent, and wanting by nature and creation, has innumerable needs and is subject to 
innumerable  pains—  and  since  He  makes  it  into  a  store of  every  sort  of  food,  and  a 
shop stocking goods of every kind that pleases man, and looks to man in this way, and 
nurtures him, and gives him what he wants... 

And since there is a Sustainer Who is thus, Who both loves man and causes man 
to  love  Him,  and  Who  is  enduring  and has  eternal  worlds,  and  Who  performs  every 
work with justice and carries out everything with wisdom; and since the splendour of 
that Pre-Eternal Sovereign’s rule and His eternal dominion cannot be contained in this 
brief worldly life, and in man’s fleeting span, and in the temporary and transient earth; 
and  since  the  excessive  wrongdoing  and  rebellion  that  occur  among  men,  which  are 
contrary to and opposed to the universe’s order, justice, balance, and beauty, and their 
denial, treachery, and disbelief towards their Benefactor, Who nurtures them tenderly, 
— since they are not punished in this world, and the cruel oppressor passes his life in 
ease  while  the  unhappy  oppressed  live  in  hardship;  and  since  the  absolute  justice 
whose  traces  are  to  be  seen  throughout  the  universe  is  entirely  opposed  to  the  cruel 
tyrant and despairing oppressed being equal in death, and would in no way permit it... 

 

210

And  since  just  as  the  universe’s  Owner  has  chosen  the  earth  from  the  universe, 
and  man  from  the  earth  and  bestowed  on him a high rank and importance; so out of 
mankind He has chosen the prophets, saints, and purified ones, true human beings who 
conform to the aims of His dominicality and through their belief and submission make 
Him  love them; He has taken them as friends and addressees, and bestowed miracles 
and  success  on  them  and  punished  their  enemies  with  heavenly  blows.  And  out  of 
these  worthy  and  lovable  friends  He  has  chosen  their  leader  and  source  of  pride, 
Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), and for long centuries has illuminated 
with  his  Light  half  the  globe  and  a  fifth  of  humanity;  as  though  the  universe  was 
created for him, all its purposes become apparent through him and his religion and the 
Qur’an.  And  although  he  deserved  to  live  for  an  infinite  time  in  recompense  for  his 
infinitely valuable service, for millions of years, he only lived a brief sixty-three years 
of  great  hardship  and  striving.  Is  there  any  possibility  then  that  he  should  not  be 
resurrected together with all his peers and friends? That they should not now be living 
in the spirit? That they should have been annihilated eternally? God forbid, a hundred 
thousand  times!  Yes,  all  the  universe  and  the  reality  of  the  world  demand  that  he 
should be resurrected and they beseech the universe’s Owner that he should be living... 
And  since  in  the  Seventh  Ray,  The  Supreme  Sign,  each  with  the  strength  of  a 
mountain,  the  thirty-three  powerful  consensuses  have  proved  that  the  universe 
emerged  from  a  single  hand  and  is  the  property  of  a  single  being;  and  have 
demonstrated  self-evidently  His  unity  and  oneness,  the  means  of  the  Divine 
perfections;  and  through  unity  and  oneness  all  beings  become  like  soldiers  under 
orders and subservient officials; and with the coming of the hereafter, perfections are 
saved  from  decline,  absolute  justice  from  mocking  cruelty,  universal  wisdom  from 
foolish absurdity, all-embracing mercy from jeering torment, and the dignity of power 
from abased impotence, and they are exonerated from this... 

Certainly and without any doubt, as necessitated by the truths in these six ‘sinces’ 
—six out of hundreds of points of belief in God— the end of the world shall come and 
the resurrection of the dead occur. Abodes of reward and punishment shall be thrown 
open  so  that  the  above-mentioned  importance  of  the  earth,  and  its  centrality,  and 
man’s  importance  and  value  shall  be  realized,  and  the  above-mentioned  justice, 
wisdom, mercy, and sovereignty of  the All-Wise Disposer, Who is the Creator of the 
earth  and  of  man,  and  their  Sustainer, shall be established; and the true and yearning 
friends of that eternal Sustainer shall be saved from eternal annihilation; and the most 
eminent and worthy of those friends receive the  

 

211

recompense for his sacred services, which have made all beings pleased and indebted; 
and the perfections of the Eternal Sovereign should be exempted and exonerated from 
all  fault  and  deficiency,  and  His  power  from  impotence,  and  His  wisdom  from 
foolishness, and His justice from tyranny. 

In Short: Since God exists, so does the hereafter certainly exist. 
Moreover, just as with all the evidences that prove them, the above three pillars of 
belief testify to and indicate resurrection; so do the two pillars “and in the angels, and 
in  Divine  Determining,  that  both  the  good  of  it  and  the  evil  of  it  are  from  God 
Almighty”  also  necessitate  resurrection  and  testify  in  powerful  fashion  to  the  eternal 
realm. It is like this:  

All the evidences proving the existence of the angels and their duties of worship, 
and  innumerable  observations  of  them  and  conversations  with  them,  prove  indirectly 
the existence of the Spirit World, and the World of the Unseen, and the eternal realm 
and  world  of  the  hereafter,  and  the  existence  of  an  abode  of  happiness  and Paradise 
and  Hell,  which  in  the  future  shall  be  populated  with  men  and  jinn.  For  with  Divine 
permission,  the  angels can see these worlds and enter them. And all the high-ranking 
angels who meet with humans, like Gabriel, tell unanimously of the existence of these 
worlds  and  of  their  travelling  round  them.  Just  as  we  are  certain,  due  to  the 
information of those coming from there, that the continent of America exists, although 
we have not seen it, so due to information about the angels, which has the strength of 
a hundredfold consensus, we should believe with the same certainty in the existence of 
the world of eternity, the realm of the hereafter, and Paradise and Hell. And so we do 
believe in it. 

Furthermore, all the evidences proving the pillar of “belief in Divine Determining,” 
included  in  the  Treatise  On  Divine  Determining,  the  Twenty-Sixth  Word,  prove 
indirectly  the  resurrection  of the dead, the balancing of deeds on the supreme scales, 
and  the  publishing  of  the  pages  of  deeds.  For  the  recording  before  our  eyes  of  the 
appointed courses of all things on the tablets of order and balance, and the inscribing 
of the life-stories of all living beings in their faculties of memory, and the transcribing 
of  the  notebooks  of  deeds  of  all  beings  with  spirits,  and  especially  men,  on  the 
Preserved  Tablet,  such  a  comprehensive  determining  and  wise  apportioning  and 
precise recording and preserving inscription could surely only be the result of a general 
judgement in a supreme tribunal set up to deal out permanent reward and punishment. 
That  comprehensive  and  precise  recording  and  preservation  would  otherwise  be 
completely meaningless and purposeless, and contrary to wisdom and reality. 

 

212

Also,  if  there  were  no  resurrection,  all  the  certain  meanings  of  the  book  of  the 
universe,  written  with  the  pen  of  Divine  Determining,  would  be  nullified,  which  is 
completely impossible. It is as impossible as denying the universe’s existence, indeed, 
is a delirium. 

In Short: With all their evidences the five pillars of belief demand the occurrence 
of  the  resurrection  and  Last  Judgement,  and  their  existence,  and  the  existence  and 
opening up of the realm of the hereafter, and they testify to these and necessitate them.  
Thus, it is because there are such vast and unshakeable supports and proofs of the 
resurrection,  completely  in  conformity  with  its  vastness,  that  almost  one  third  of the 
Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  is  formed  by  resurrection  and  the  hereafter,  and  it 
makes it the basis and foundation stone of all its truths, and constructs everything on 
it. 

(The end of the Introduction) 

The Tenth Ray 

This  consists  of  detailed  descriptions  of  the  contents  of  The  Flashes 
Collection,  from  The  Fifteenth  to  the  Thirtieth  Flashes  and  The  Rays 
Collection from the First to the Ninth Rays.  

 

213

The Eleventh Ray 
A Fruit of Denizli Prison 

[This  is  a  defence  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  against  atheism  and  absolute 
disbelief. It is our true defence in this imprisonment of ours, for it is only 
this  we  are  working  at.  This  treatise  is  a  fruit  and  souvenir  of  Denizli 
Prison, and the product of two Fridays.] 

                                                       S a i d  N u r s i 

 

214

The Fruits of Belief 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
And he languished in prison for a number of years more.1 

According to an inner meaning of this  verse, Joseph (Peace be upon him) is 
the patron of prisoners and prison is a sort of ‘School of Joseph.’ Since this is 
the  second  time  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  have  been  sent  to  prison in large 
numbers,  it  is  necessary  to  study  and  teach  in  this  school,  which  has  been 
opened  to  give  this  training,  the  brief  summaries  of  a  number  of  matters 
connected with prison that the Risale-i Nur proves, and to benefit from them 
thoroughly. We shall explain five or six of those summaries. 

The First Topic 

As  is  explained  in  the  Fourth  Word,  everyday  our  Creator  bestows  on  us  the 
capital  of  twenty-four  hours  of  life  so  that  with  it  we  may  obtain  all  the  things 
necessary for our two lives. If we spend twenty-three hours on this fleeting worldly life 
and neglect to spend the remaining one hour, which is sufficient for the five obligatory 
prayers,  on  the  very  lengthy  life  of  the  hereafter,  it  may  be  understood  what  an 
unreasonable error it is, and what a great loss to suffer distress of the mind and spirit 
as the penalty for the error, and to behave badly because of the distress, and to fail to 
rectify one’s conduct due to living in a state of despair, indeed, to do the opposite. We 
may make the comparison. 

We  should  think  of  what  a  profitable  ordeal  it is —if we spend the one hour on 
the  five  obligatory  prayers—  each  hour  of  this  calamitous  term  of  imprisonment 
sometimes  becoming  a  day’s  worship  and  one  of  its  transient  hours  becoming  many 
permanent  hours,  and  our  despair  and  distress  of  the  spirit  and  heart  in  part 
disappearing,  and  its  being  atonement  for  the  mistakes  that  led  to  the  imprisonment 
and the cause of their being  

                                             

1 Qur’an, 12:42. 

 

215

forgiven,  and  being  trained  and  improved, which is the purpose of imprisonment; we 
should  think  of  its  being  instruction  and  a  pleasant  and  consoling  meeting  with  our 
companions in disaster. 

As  is  said  in  the  Fourth  Word,  it  may  be  understood  how  contrary  it  is  to  a 
person’s interests to give five or ten liras out of his twenty-four to a lottery in which a 
thousand people are taking part in order to win the thousand-lira prize, and not give a 
single lira out of the twenty-four for a ticket for an everlasting treasury of jewels, and 
to  rush  to  the  fomer  and  flee  from  the  latter,  —although  the  chance  of  winning  the 
thousand liras in the worldly lottery is one in a thousand because there are a thousand 
people  taking  part,  while  in the lottery of man’s destiny which looks to the hereafter 
the  chance  of  winning  for  the  people  of  belief,  who  experience happy deaths, is nine 
hundred  and  ninety-nine  out  of  a  thousand,  as  has  been  stated  by  one  hundred  and 
twenty-four  thousand  prophets  and  confirmed  by  incalculable  numbers  of  truthful 
informers from among the saints and purified scholars as a result of their illuminations. 
Prison  governors and chief warders, and indeed the country’s administrators and 
the guardians of public order, should be grateful at this lesson of the Risale-i Nur, for 
the government and disciplining of a thousand believers who constantly have in mind 
the prison of Hell is far easier than that of ten who have no belief and do not perform 
the  obligatory  prayers,  only  think  of  worldly  prisons,  do  not  know  what  is  licit  and 
what is illicit, and are in part accustomed to living undisciplined lives. 

 

216

A Summary of the Second Topic 

As is well explained in A Guide For Youth from the Risale-i Nur, it is as definite 
and  obvious  that  death  will  befall  us  as  the  night  will  follow  today  and  winter,  this 
autumn.  Just  as  this  prison  is  a  temporary  guest-house  for  those  who  continuously 
enter  it  and  leave  it;  so  the  face  of  the  earth  is  a  hostel  on  the  road  of  the  swiftly 
travelling  caravans  which  alight  for  one  night  then  pass  on.  Surely  death,  which  has 
emptied  all  the  cities  into  the  graveyard  a  hundred  times  over,  has  demands  greater 
than life. The Risale-i Nur has solved the riddle of this awesome truth and discovered 
its answer. A short summary of it is this: 

Since death cannot be killed nor the door of the grave be closed, if there is a way 
of  being  saved  from  the  executioner  of  the  appointed  hour  and  the  solitary 
confinement  of  the  grave,  it  is  a  question,  an  anxiety,  for  man  of  greater importance 
than  anything.  Yes,  there  is  a  solution,  and  through  the  mystery  of  the  Qur’an,  the 
Risale-i Nur has proved it as certainly as two plus two equals four. A brief summary of 
it is as follows: 

Death  is  either  eternal annihilation, a gallows on which will be hanged both man 
and  all  his  friends  and  relations;  or  it  comprises  the  release  papers  to  depart  for 
another, eternal, realm, and to enter, with the document of belief, the palace of bliss. 
The  grave  is  either  a  bottomless pit and dark place of solitary confinement, or it is a 
door  opening  from  the  prison  of  this  world  onto  an  eternal,  light-filled  garden  and 
place of feasting. A Guide For Youth has proved this truth with a comparison. 

For  example;  gallows  have  been  set  up  in  this  prison  yard,  and  behind  the  wall 
immediately beyond them a huge lottery office has been opened in the lottery of which 
the whole world has taken part. We five hundred people in this prison are certain to be 
summoned  one  by  one  without  exception  to  that  arena;  to  avoid  it  is  not  possible. 
Everywhere  announcements  are  being  made:  “Come  and  receive  your  decree  of 
execution,  and  mount  the  gallows!”,  or:  “Take  the  note  for  everlasting  solitary 
confinement, and take that door!”, or: “Good news for you! The winning ticket worth 
millions  has  come  up for you. Come and receive it!” We see with our own eyes that 
one  after  the  other  they  are  mounting  the  gallows.  We  observe  that  some  are  being 
hanged, while others are making the gallows a step, and moving onto the lottery office 
beyond the wall. Just at that point, which we know  

 

217

as  though  we  have  seen  it  from  the  certain  information  given  by  the  high-ranking 
officials there, two groups have entered our prison. 

 One  group  are  holding  musical  instruments,  wine,  and  apparently  sweet 
confections  and  pastries  which  they  are  trying  to  make  us  eat.  But  the  sweets  are  in 
fact lethal, for satans in human form have laced them with poison. 

The second group are carrying instructive writings, licit foods, and blessed drinks. 
They present them to us and all together say to us with great earnestness: “If you take 
and eat the gifts the first group gave you by way of testing you, you shall be hanged on 
these gallows before us like the others you have seen. Whereas if you accept the gifts 
we  have  brought  you  on  the  command  of  this  country’s  Ruler  in  place  of  them,  and 
recite the supplications and prayers in the instructive writings, you shall be saved from 
execution.  Believe  as  though  you  were  seeing  it  that  each  of  you  shall  receive  the 
winning ticket worth millions in the lottery office as a royal favour. These decrees say, 
and  we  ourselves  say  the  same  thing,  that  if  you  eat  those  illicit,  dubious,  and 
poisonous  sweets,  you  shall  suffer  terrible  pains  from  the  poison  until  you  go  to  be 
hanged.” 

Like  this  comparison,  for  the  people  of  belief  and  worship  —on  condition  they 
have happy deaths— the ticket for an everlasting and inexhaustible treasury will come 
up from the lottery of man’s destiny beyond the gallows of the appointed hour, which 
we  always  see.  For  those  who  persist  in  vice,  unlawful  actions,  unbelief,  and  sin, 
however, there is a hundred per cent probability that on condition they do not repent, 
they  will  receive  the  summons  to  either  eternal  annihilation  (for  those  who  do  not 
believe  in  the  hereafter),  or  to  permanent,  dark  solitary  confinement  (for  those  who 
believe  in  the  immortality  of  man’s  spirit,  but  take  the  way  of  vice)  and  eternal 
perdition.  Certain  news  of  this  has  been  given  by  the  hundred  and  twenty-four 
thousand  prophets2  with  their  innumerable  miracles,  which  confirm  them;  and  by the 
more  than  one  hundred  and  twenty-four million  saints,  who see in their illuminations 
the traces and shadows —as though on a cinema screen— of what the prophets have 
told,  and  put  their  signatures  to  it,  affirming  it;  and  by  the  more  than  thousands  of 
millions  of  investigative  scholars,3  interpreters  of  the  law,  and  veracious  ones  who, 
with  decisive  proofs  and  powerful  arguments,  prove  according  to  reason  and 
absolutely certainly the things told by those two eminent groups of mankind, and have 
set their signatures to them. The situation  

                                             

2 Mishkat al-Masabih, iii, 122. See also, Zad al-Ma’ad (tahqiq: al-Arna’ut), i, 43-4. 
3 One of those investigative scholars is the Risale-i Nur, which for twenty years has been 
silencing the most obstinate philosophers and obdurate atheists. Its various parts are available; 
everyone may read them, and no one can object to them. 

 

218

then  of  someone  who  does  not  heed  the  news  given  unanimously  by  the  decrees  of 
these three vast and elevated communities and groups of the people of reality, who are 
the  suns,  moons,  and  stars  of  mankind  and  the  sacred  leaders  of humanity, and does 
not  take  the  straight  path  which  they  have  pointed  out,  and  disregards  the  awesome 
ninety-nine per cent danger, and abandons that way due to one person saying there is 
danger on it and takes another, lengthy, way — his situation is as follows: 

The  wretch  who  since  he  has  abandoned,  according  to  the  certain  news  of 
innumerable well-informed observers, the shortest and easiest of the two ways, which 
with a hundred  per cent certainty will lead to Paradise and eternal happiness, and has 
chosen the roughest, longest way, which is most fraught with difficulties and is ninety-
nine  per  cent  certain  will  lead  to  incarceration  in  Hell  and  everlasting  misery,  and 
leaves the short way because, according to the false information of a single informer, 
there is a one per cent chance of danger and the possibility of a month’s imprisonment, 
and  chooses  the  long  way,  which  is  without  benefit,  just because it holds no danger, 
like drunken lunatics, —such a wretch has lost his humanity, mind, heart, and spirit to 
the  extent  that  he  ignores  the  terrible  dragons  which  are  seen  from  afar  and  are 
pestering him, and struggles against mosquitoes, attaching importance to them alone. 

Since this is the reality of the situation, so that we avenge ourselves totally for this 
calamity of prison, we prisoners should accept the gifts of the second, blessed, group. 
That  is  to  say,  just  as  the  pleasure  of  a  minute’s  revenge  or  a  minute  or  two,  or  an 
hour of two, of vice, or this calamity, has put us in this prison for fifteen, five, ten, or 
two or three years, and made our worlds into a prison; so to spite it, we should avenge 
ourselves  on  this  calamity  by  transforming  an  hour  or  two  of  our  prison  lives  into  a 
day or two of worship, and our two or three-year-sentences —through the gifts of the 
blessed group— into twenty or thirty years of permanent life, and our prison sentences 
of  twenty  or  thirty  years  into  a  means  of  forgiveness  from  millions  of  years  of 
incarceration  in  the  dungeons  of  Hell.  In  the  face  of  our  transitory  worlds’ weeping, 
we  should  make  our  everlasting  lives  smile.  We  should  show prison to be a place of 
training and education, and each of us try to be well-behaved, reliable, useful members 
of  our  nation  and  country.  While  the  prison  officers,  administrators,  and  governors 
should see that the men they supposed to be criminals, bandits, layabouts, murderers, 
depraved,  and  harmful  to  the  country  are  students  studying  in  this  blessed  place  of 
instruction, and should proudly offer thanks to God. 

 

219

The Third Topic 

This is the summary of an instructive incident which is described in A Guide For 

Youth. 

One  time,  I  was  sitting  by my window in Eskishehir Prison during the ‘Republic 
Festival.’  Opposite me, the older girls of the High School were laughing and dancing 
in the schoolyard. Suddenly their condition fifty years hence appeared to me, as though 
on  a  cinema  screen.  I  saw  that  of  those  fifty  to  sixty  girl  students,  forty  to  fifty  had 
become  earth  in  their  graves,  and  were  suffering  torments.  While  ten  were  ugly 
seventy  to  eighty-year-olds  who  were despised where they might have expected love 
because  they  did  not  preserve  their  chastity  when  young.  This  I  observed  with 
complete certainty and I wept at their piteable states. Some of my friends in the prison 
heard my weeping, and came and asked me about it. I told them: “Leave me alone for 
now, I want to be alone.” 

Yes, what I saw was reality, not imagination. Just as the summer and autumn are 
followed by winter, so the summer of youth and autumn of old age are followed by the 
winter of the grave and Intermediate Realm. If there was a cinema which showed the 
events of fifty years in the future, the same as those of fifty years ago are shown in the 
present, and the people of misguidance and vice were to be shown their circumstances 
of fifty or sixty years hence, they would weep in horror and disgust at their unlawful 
pleasures and those things at which they now laugh. 

When  preoccupied  with  these  observations  in  Eskishehir  Prison,  a  collective 
personality which spreads vice and misguidance was embodied before me like a human 
satan. It said: 

“We  want  to  experience  all  the  pleasures  and  joys  of  life,  and  to  make  others 

experience them; don’t interfere with us!”  

I  replied:  Since  you  do  not  recall  death  and  plunge  yourself  into  vice  and 
misguidance for pleasure and enjoyment, you should certainly know that  due to your 
misguidance,  all  the  past  is  dead  and  non-existent;  it  is  a  desolate  graveyard  full  of 
rotted bodies. The suffering arising from those innumerable separations and the eternal 
deaths of those numberless friends inflicted on your head through the concern of your 
humanity and your misguidance, and on your heart if you have one and it is not dead,  

 

220

will  soon  destroy  your  insignificant  drunken  pleasure  of  the  present.  The  future  too, 
due to your unbelief, is a non-existent, black, dead, and desolate wasteland. And since 
the heads of the unfortunates who appear from there, sticking them out into existence 
while  stopping  by  in  the  present,  are  struck  off  by  the  executioner’s  sword  of  the 
appointed hour and thrown into non-existence, due to the concern of your intellect, it 
continuously  rains  down  grievous  worries  on  your  unbelieving  head,  completely 
overturning your petty, dissolute pleasure. 

If  you  give  up  vice  and  misguidance  and  enter  the  sphere  of  certain,  verified 
belief4  and  righteousness,  you  will  see  through  the  light  of  belief  that  the  past  is  not 
non-existent  and  a  graveyard  that  rots  everything,  but  an  existent,  light-filled  world 
which  is  transformed  into  the future and into a waiting-room for the immortal spirits 
who will enter palaces of bliss in the future. Since it appears thus, it affords not pain, 
but according to the strength of belief, a sort of paradaisical pleasure. The future, too, 
appears  to  the  eye  of  belief  not  as  a  dark  wasteland,  but  where  banquets  and 
exhibitions  of  gifts  have  been  set  up  in  palaces  of  everlasting  bliss  by  the  Most 
Merciful  and  Compassionate  One  of  Glory  and  Bestowal,  Whose  mercy  and 
munificence are infinite and Who makes the spring and summer into tables laden with 
bounties.  Since,  knowing  he  will  be  despatched  there,  a  person  observes  this  on the 
cinema screen of belief, he may experience in a way the pleasures of the eternal realm. 
All  may  do  this  according  to  their  degree.  That  is  to  say,  true,  painfree  pleasure  is 
found only in belief in God, and is possible only through belief. 

Being related to our discussion, we shall explain here by means of a comparison, 
which  is  included  in  A  Guide  For  Youth  as  a  footnote,  only  a  single  benefit  and 
pleasure out of the thousands that belief produces in this world too. It is as follows: 

For example, your beloved only child is suffering the pangs of death and you are 
thinking despairingly of your being eternally parted from him. Then suddenly a doctor 
like  Khidr  or  Luqman  the  Wise  arrives  with  a  wondrous  medicine.  Your  lovely  and 
lovable child opens his eyes, delivered from death. You can understand what joy and 
happiness it would give you. 

Now,  like  the  child,  millions  of  people  whom  you  earnestly  love  and  are 
concerned for are —in your view— rotting in the graveyard of the past and are about 
to be annihilated, when suddenly the reality of belief, like Luqman the Wise, shines a 
light from the window of heart onto the  

                                             

1. [Tr.] 

4 For ‘certain, verified belief’ (iman-i tahkikî), see, page 488 footnote 71, and page 568 footnote 

 

221

graveyard, which is imagined to be a vast place of execution. Through it, all the dead 
spring to life. On their declaring through the tongue of disposition: “We had not died 
and shall not die; we shall meet with you again,” you feel an endless joy, which belief 
gives  in  this  world  too,  proving  that  belief  in  God  is  a  seed  that  were  it  to  be 
embodied,  a  private  paradise  would  emerge  from  it,  becoming  the  Tuba-tree  of  that 
seed. I told the collective personality this, and in its stubbornness, it said: 

“At least we can live like animals, passing our lives in pleasure and enjoyment, and 

by indulging in amusement and dissipation not thinking about these difficult matters.” 

I told it by way of an answer: 
“You  cannot  be  like  an  animal,  for  animals  have  no  past  and  future.  They  feel 
neither  sorrows  or  regrets  at  the  past,  nor  anxiety  and  fear  at  the  future.  It  receives 
perfect pleasure; it sleeps and rises and thanks its Creator. An animal held down to be 
slaughtered, even, does not feel anything. It wants to feel it as the knife cuts, but that 
feeling  disappears  as  well,  and  it  is  saved  from  the  pain.  This  means  that  a  great 
instance of Divine mercy and compassion is not making known the Unseen, and veiling 
the things that will befall one.  It is more complete for innocent animals. But, O man, 
your past and future emerge from the Unseen to an extent because of your reason, so 
you  are  entirely  deprived  of  the  unconcern  of  the  animals  due  to  the  Unseen  being 
concealed  from  them.  The  regrets  and  painful  separations  coming from the past, and 
the anxieties coming from the future reduce to nothing your insignificant pleasure; they 
make  it  a  hundred  times  less  than  that  which  the  animals  receive. Since the reality is 
this, either throw away your intellect, become an animal and be saved, or come to your 
senses through belief; listen to the Qur’an, and receive pure pleasure a hundred times 
greater than that of the animals in this transitory world too.” Saying this, I silenced it. 

Yet, that obdurate collective personality still turned to me and said: “At least we 

can live like those Westerners who are without religion.” 

I replied: “You cannot be like the irreligious people of Europe, either. For even if 
they  deny  one  prophet,  they  can  believe  in  the  others.  If  they  do  not  know  the 
prophets,  they  may  believe  in  God.  And  even  if  they  do  not  know  God,  they  may 
possess certain personal qualities through which they find fulfilment. But if a Muslim 
denies  the  Prophet  of  the  End  of  Time  (Peace  and  blessings  be upon him), who was 
the final and greatest of the prophets and whose religion and cause are universal, and if 
he  abandons his religion, he will accept no other prophet and perhaps  not even God. 
For he knows all the prophets and God and all perfections  

 

222

through the Prophet of the End of Time (Peace and blessings be upon him); they can 
have no place in his heart without him. It is for this reason that since early times people 
have  entered  Islam  from  all  other  religions,  but  no  Muslim  has  become  a  true  Jew, 
Magian,  or  Christian.  Muslims  who  abandon  their  religion  rather  become  irreligious, 
their characters are corrupted, and they become harmful for the country and nation.” I 
proved  this,  and  the  obstinate  collective  personality  could  find  no  further  straw  to 
clutch at, so it vanished and went to Hell. 

My friends who are studying together with me in this School of Joseph! Since the 
reality is this and the Risale-i Nur proves it so clearly and decisively, like sunlight, that 
for  twenty  years  it  has  broken  the  obstinacy  of  the  obdurate  and  brought  them  to 
believe; we should therefore follow the way of belief and right conduct, which is easy 
and safe and beneficial for both our own worlds, and our futures, and our lives in the 
hereafter, and our country and nation; and spend our free time reciting the suras of the 
Qur’an that we know instead of indulging in distressing fancies, and learn the meaning 
from friends who teach them; and make up for the prayers we have failed to perform in 
the  past,  when  we  should  have  done;  and  taking  advantage  of  one  another’s  good 
qualities,  transform  this  prison  into  a  blessed  garden  raising  the  seedlings  of  good 
character.  With  good  deeds  like  these,  we  should  do  our  best  to  make  the  prison 
governor  and  those  concerned  not  torturers  like  the  Angels  of  Hell  standing  over 
criminals  and  murderers,  but  righteous  masters  and  kindly  guards  charged  with  the 
duties  of  raising  people  for  Paradise  in  the  School  of  Joseph  and  supervising  their 
training and education. 

 

223

The Fourth Topic 

Again, there is an explanation of this in A Guide For Youth. One time, I was asked 

the following question by the brothers who assist me: 

“For  fifty  days  now  —and  now  seven  years  have  passed5  —  you  have  asked 
nothing at all about this ghastly World War, which has plunged the whole world into 
chaos and is closely connected with the fate of the Islamic world, nor have you been 
curious  about  it.  Whereas  some  religious  and  learned  persons  are  leaving  the 
congregation  in  the  mosques  and  racing  to  listen  to  the  radio.  Is  there  some  event 
more momentous than the war? Or is it harmful in some way to be preoccupied with 
it?” 

I  replied  to  them:  Life’s  capital  is  very  little  and  the  work  to  be  done  is  much. 
There  are  spheres  one  within  the  other  like  concentric  circles,  from  the  sphere  of 
man’s  heart  and  stomach,  and  that  of  his  home  and  body,  and  that  of  the  quarter  in 
which he lives and his town, and his country and land, and the globe and mankind, to 
the spheres of animate beings and the world. Each person may have duties in each of 
those spheres, but the most important and permanent of these are those in the smallest 
sphere.  While  his  least  important  and  temporary  duties  may  be  in  the  largest  sphere. 
According  to  this  analogy,  the  largest  and  smallest  are  in  inverse  proportion.  But 
because of the attractiveness of the largest sphere, it causes the person to neglect his 
important, necessary duties in the small sphere, busying him with unnecessary, trivial, 
peripheral matters. It destroys the capital of his life for nothing. It kills his precious life 
on worthless things. Sometimes, the one following curiously the struggles of the war 
comes  to  earnestly  support  one  side.  He  looks  favourably  on  their  tyranny,  and 
becomes a partner in it. 

The  Answer  to  the  first  point:  Yes,  an  event  more  momentous  than  this  World 
War  and  a  case  more  important  than  that  of  world supremacy has been opened over 
the heads of everyone and especially Muslims, so that if everyone had the wealth and 
power of the Germans and English and sense as well, they would unhesitatingly spend 
all of it to win that single case. The case is this: relying on the thousands of promises 
and pledges of the universe’s Owner, Who has disposal over it, hundreds of  

                                             

5 This refers to 1946. 

 

224

thousands  of  the  most  eminent  of  mankind,  and  uncounted  numbers  of  its  stars  and 
guides,  have  unanimously  given  news  —and  some  of  them  have actually seen— that 
for everyone the case has opened by which they may either win, in return for belief, or 
lose, eternal properties as broad as the earth set with palaces and gardens. If they do 
not  secure  the  document  of  belief,  they  will  lose.  And  this  age,  many  are  losing  the 
case  because  of  the  plague  of  materialism.  One  of  the  diviners  of  reality  and 
investigators of truth observed in one place that out of forty people who died, only a 
few won; the others lost. Can anything take the place of that lost suit, even rule over 
the whole world? 

Since we Risale-i Nur students know it would be pure lunacy to give up the duties 
which will win the case and abandon the wondrous lawyer who saves ninety per cent 
from losing it and the task which the lawyer employs us in, and become involved with 
peripheral  trivia  as  though  we  were  going  to  remain  in  the  world  for  ever,  we  are 
certain that if each of us had intelligence a hundred times greater than what we have, 
we still would use it only on this task. 

My new brothers here in this calamity of prison! You have seen the Risale-i Nur 
the  same  as  my  old  brothers,  who  entered  here  together  with  me.  Citing  them  and 
thousands of students like them as witnesses, I say, I prove, and have proved, that it is 
the  Risale-i  Nur  that  wins  that  supreme  case  for  ninety  people  out  of  a  hundred, 
obtains  for  them  certain,  verified  belief,  which  is  the  document  and  warrant  that  has 
won  the  case  for  twenty thousand people in twenty years. It has proceeded from the 
miraculousness of the All-Wise Qur’an and is the leading lawyer at this time. Although 
these  eighteen  years  my  enemies  and  the  atheists  and  materialists  have  duped  some 
members  of  the  government  with  their  exceedingly  cruel  plots  against  me,  and  have 
had us sent to prison to have us done away with — in the past as now, they have been 
able  to  cause  harm  to  only  two  or  three  of  the  one  hundred  and  thirty  pieces  of 
equipment in the steel fortress of the Risale-i Nur. That means, to obtain it is sufficient 
for  those  who  want  to  engage  a  lawyer.  Also,  fear  not,  the  Risale-i  Nur  cannot  be 
banned! With the exception of two or three, its treatises are circulating freely among 
the deputies serving the Government of the Republic, and its leaders. God willing, at 
some time happy governors and guards will distribute those lights to the prisoners, like 
bread and medicine, and so make the prisons into truly effective places of reform. 

 

225

The Fifth Topic 

As is described in A Guide For Youth, there is no doubt that youth will depart; it 
will change into old age and death as certainly as the summer gives its place to autumn 
and  winter,  and  the  day  changes  into  evening  and  night.  All  the  revealed  scriptures 
give the good news that if fleeting, transient youth is spent on good works, in chastity 
and within the bounds of good conduct, it will gain for the person immortal youth. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  youth  is  spent  on  vice,  just  as  murder  resulting  from  a 
minute’s anger leads to millions of minutes of imprisonment, so quite apart from being 
called to account in the hereafter, and the torments of the grave, and the regrets arising 
from  their  passing,  and  sins,  and  the  penalties  suffered  in  this  world,  the  unlawful 
pleasures  of  youth  contain  more  pain  than  pleasure;  every  youth  with  sense  will 
corroborate this from his own experience. 

For example, the pains of jealousy, separation, and unreciprocated love transform 
the  partial  pleasure  to  be  found  in  illicit  love  into  poisonous  honey.  If  you  want  to 
know how they end up in hospitals due to illnesses resulting from their misspent youth, 
and in prison due to their excesses, and in bars and dens of vice and the graveyard due 
to  the  distress  arising  from  their  unnourished  hearts  and  spirits  not  performing  their 
right functions,  go and ask at the hospitals, prisons, bars, and graveyards. More than 
anything,  you  will  hear  the  weeping  and  sighs  of  regret  at  the  blows  youths  have 
received as the penalty for abusing their youth, and their excesses, and illicit pleasures. 
Foremost the Qur’an, with numerous of its verses, and all the revealed scriptures 
and books, give the glad tidings that if spent within the bounds of moderation, youth is 
an  agreeable Divine  bounty  and  sweet,  powerful  means  to  good  works, which yields 
the result of shining, immortal youth in the hereafter. 

Since  the  reality  is  this,  and  since  the  bounds  of  the  licit  are  sufficient  for 
enjoyment, and since an hour of unlawful pleasure leads sometimes to a punishment of 
one,  or ten,  years’ imprisonment; surely it is absolutely necessary to spend the  sweet 
bounty of youth chastely, on the straight path, as thanks for the bounty. 

 

226

The Sixth Topic 

 [This consists of a single, brief proof of the pillar of belief, ‘Belief in God,’ 
for which there are numerous decisive proofs and explanations in many places 
in the Risale-i Nur.] 

In Kastamonu a group of high-school students came to me, saying: “Tell us about 
our Creator, our teachers do not speak of God.” I said to them: “All the sciences you 
study  continuously  speak  of  God  and  make  known  the  Creator,  each  with  its  own 
particular tongue. Do not listen to your teachers; listen to them. 

“For  example,  a  well-equipped  pharmacy  with  life-giving  potions  and  cures  in 
every jar weighed out in precise and wondrous measures doubtless shows an extremely 
skilful, practised, and wise pharmacist. In the same way, to the extent that it is bigger 
and  more  perfect  and  better  stocked  than  the  pharmacy  in  the  market-place,  the 
pharmacy of the globe of the earth with its living potions and medicaments in the jars 
which  are the four hundred thousand species of plants and animals shows and makes 
known to eyes that are blind even —by means of the measure or scale of the science of 
medicine  that  you  study—  the  All-Wise  One  of  Glory,  Who  is the Pharmacist of the 
mighty pharmacy of the earth.  

“To  take another example; a wondrous factory which weaves thousands of sorts 
of  cloth  from  a  simple  material  doubtless  makes  known  a  manufacturer  and  skilful 
mechanic.  In the same way, to whatever extent it is larger and more perfect than the 
human factory, this travelling dominical machine known as the globe of the earth with 
its  hundreds  of  thousands  of  heads,  in  each  of  which  are  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
factories, shows and makes known —by means of the measure or scale of the science 
of engineering which you study— its Manufacturer and Owner. 

“And, for example, a depot, store, or shop in which has been brought together and 
stored  up  in  regular  and  orderly  fashion  a  thousand  and  one  varieties  of  provisions 
undoubtedly makes known a wondrous owner, proprietor, and overseer of provisions 
and foodstuffs. In just the same way, to whatever degree it is vaster and more perfect 
than  such  a  store  or  factory,  this  foodstore  of  the  Most  Merciful  One  known  as the 
globe of the earth, this Divine ship, this dominical depot and shop holding goods,  

 

227

equipment, and conserved food, which in one year travels regularly an orbit of twenty-
four  thousand  years,  and  carrying  groups  of  beings  requiring  different  foods  and 
passing  through  the  seasons  on  its  journey  and  filling  the  spring  with  thousands  of 
different  provisions  like  a  huge  waggon,  brings  them  to  the  wretched  animate 
creatures whose sustenance has been exhausted in winter, —by means of the measure 
or scale of the science of economics which you study— this depot of the earth makes 
known and makes loved its Manager, Organizer, and Owner.      

“And,  for  example,  let  us  imagine  an  army  which  consists  of  four  hundred 
thousand  nations,  and  each  nation  requires  different  provisions,  uses  different 
weapons, wears different uniforms, undergoes different drill, and is discharged from its 
duties differently. If this army and camp has a miracle-working commander who on his 
own  provides  all  those  different  nations  with  all  their  different  provisions,  weapons, 
uniforms, and equipment without forgetting or confusing any of them, then surely the 
army  and  camp  show  the  commander  and  make  him  loved  appreciatively. In just the 
same  way,  the  spring  camp  of  the  face  of  the  earth  in  which  every  spring  a  newly 
recruited Divine army of the four hundred thousand species of plants and animals are 
given their varying uniforms, rations, weapons, training, and demobilizations in utterly 
perfect and regular fashion by a single Commander-in-Chief Who forgets or confuses 
not one of them —to whatever extent the spring camp of the face of the earth is vaster 
and  more  perfect  than  that  human  army,  —by  means  of  the  measure  or  scale  of the 
military  science  that  you  study—  it  makes  known  to  the  attentive  and  sensible,  its 
Ruler, Sustainer, Administrator, and Most Holy Commander, causing wonderment and 
acclaim, and makes Him loved and praised and glorified. 

“Another  example:  millions  of  electric  lights  that  move  and  travel  through  a 
wondrous city, their fuel and power source never being exhausted, self-evidently make 
known  a  wonder-working  craftsman  and  extraordinarily  talented  electrician  who 
manages the electricity, makes the moving lamps, sets up the power source, and brings 
the  fuel;  they  cause  others  to  congratulate  and  applaud  him,  and to love him. In just 
the same way, although some of the lamps of the stars in the roof of the palace of the 
world  in  the  city  of  the  universe  —if  they  are  considered  in  the  way  that  astronomy 
says— are a thousand times larger than the earth and move seventy times faster than a 
cannon-ball,  they  do  not  spoil  their  order,  nor  collide  with  one  another,  nor  become 
extinguished,  nor  is  their  fuel  exhausted.  According  to  astronomy,  which  you  study, 
for  our  sun  to  continue  burning,  which  is  a million  times  larger  than the  earth  and  a 
million times older and is a lamp and stove in one guest-house of the Most  

 

228

Merciful One, as much oil as the seas of the earth and as much coal as its mountains or 
as many logs and much wood as ten earths are necessary for it not to be extinguished. 
And however much greater and more perfect than this example are the electric lamps 
of  the palace of the world in the majestic city of the universe, which point with their 
fingers  of  light  to  an  infinite  power  and  sovereignty  which  illuminates  the  sun  and 
other  lofty  stars  like  it  without  oil,  wood,  or  coal,  not  allowing  them  to  be 
extinguished or to collide with one another, though travelling together at speed, to that 
degree —by means of the measure of the science of electricity which you either study 
or  will  study—  they  testify  to  and  make  known  the  Monarch,  Illuminator,  Director, 
and  Maker  of  the  mighty  exhibition  of  the  universe;  they  make  Him  loved,  glorified, 
and worshipped. 

“And,  for  example,  take  a  book  in  every  line  of  which  a  whole  book  is  finely 
written, and in every word of which a sura of the Qur’an is inscribed with a fine pen. 
Being  most  meaningful  with  all  of  its  matters  corroborating  one  another,  and  a 
wondrous  collection  showing  its  writer  and  author  to  be  extraordinarily  skilful  and 
capable,  it  undoubtedly  shows  its  writer  and  author  together  with  all  his  perfections 
and arts as clearly as daylight, and makes him known. It makes him appreciated with 
phrases like, “What wonders God has willed!” and “Blessed be God!” Just the same is 
the mighty book of the universe; we see with our eyes a pen at work which writes on 
the face of the earth, which is a single of its pages, and on the spring, which is a single 
folio,  the  three  hundred  thousand  plant  and  animal  species,  which  are  like  three 
hundred thousand different books, all together, one within the other, without fault or 
error, without mixing them up or confusing them, perfectly and with complete order, 
and sometimes writes an ode in a word like a tree, and the complete index of a book in 
a  point-like  seed.  However  much  vaster  and  more  perfect  and  meaningful  than  the 
book in the example mentioned above is this compendium of the universe and mighty 
embodied Qur’an of the world, which is infinitely full of meaning and in every word of 
which  are  numerous  instances  of  wisdom,  to  that  degree  —in  accordance  with  the 
extensive  measure  and far-seeing vision of the natural science that you  study and  the 
sciences  of  reading  and  writing  that  you  have  practised  at school—  it  makes  known 
the  Inscriber  and  Author  of  the  book  of  the  universe  together  with  His  infinite 
perfections. Proclaiming “God is Most Great!”, it makes Him known. Uttering phrases 
like “Glory be to God!”, it describes Him. Acclaiming Him with words like “All praise 
be to God!”, it makes Him loved. 

“Thus, hundreds of other sciences like these make known the Glorious Creator of 

the universe together with His Names, each through its broad  

 

229

measure  or  scale,  its  particular  mirror,  its  far-seeing  eyes,  and  searching  gaze;  they 
make known His attributes and perfections. 

“It is in order to give instruction in this matter, which is a brilliant and magnificent 
proof of Divine unity, that the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition teaches us about our 
Creator most often with the verses, Sustainer of the Heavens and the Earth,6 and, He 
created  the  Heavens  and  Earth.”7 I said  this  to the schoolboys, and they accepted it 
completely, affirming it by saying: “Endless thanks be to God, for we have received an 
absolutely true and sacred lesson. May God be pleased with you!” And I said: 

“Man is a  living machine who is grieved with thousands of different sorrows and 
receives  pleasure  in  thousands  of  different  ways,  and  despite  his  utter  impotence has 
innumerable  enemies,  physical  and  spiritual,  and  despite  his  infinite  poverty,  has 
countless needs, external and inner, and is a wretched creature continuously suffering 
the  blows  of  death  and  separation.  Yet,  through  belief  and  worship,  he  at  once 
becomes  connected  to  a  Monarch  so  Glorious  he  finds  a  point of support against all 
his enemies and a source of help for all his needs, and like everyone takes pride at the 
honour and rank of the lord to whom he is attached, you can compare for yourselves 
how  pleased  and  grateful  and  thankful  and  full  of  pride  man  becomes  at  being 
connected  through  belief  to  an  infinitely  Powerful  and  Compassionate  Monarch,  at 
entering His service through worship, and transforming for himself the announcement 
of the execution of the appointed hour into the papers releasing him from duty.” 

I  repeat  to  the  calamity-stricken  prisoners  what  I  said  to  the  schoolboys:  “One 
who recognizes Him and obeys Him is fortunate even if he is in prison. While one who 
forgets  Him  is  wretched  and  a  prisoner  even  if  he  resides  in  a  palace.”  Even,  one 
wronged  but  fortunate  man  said to  the wretched tyrants who were executing him: “I 
am  not  being  executed  but  being  demobilized  and  departing  for  where  I  shall  find 
happiness.  But  I  see  that  you  are  being  condemned  to  eternal  execution  and  am 
therefore taking perfect revenge on you.” And declaring: “There is no god but God!”, 
he happily surrendered up his spirit. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.8 

                                             

6 Qur’an, 6:1. 
7 Qur’an, 13:16. 
8 Qur’an, 2:32. 

 

230

The Seventh Topic 

 [The fruit of a Friday in Denizli Prison] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
The command of the Hour [of resurrection] will be like the glance of an eye, 
or  briefer.9  *  The  creation  of  you  all  and  the  resurrection of you all is but 
like  that  of  a single  soul.10  *  So  look  to  the  signs  of God’s  mercy,  how  He 
gives life to the earth after its death; He it is Who will raise the dead to life, 
and He is Powerful over all things.11  

The prisoners in Denizli Prison who were able to have contact with me, read the 
lesson in the Sixth Topic I had at one time given in the tongues of the sciences to the 
high school pupils in Kastamonu, who had asked me: “Tell us about our Creator,” and 
having  acquired  a  firm  belief, they felt a  longing for the  hereafter. They requested of 
me: “Teach us also about the hereafter so that we won’t be led astray by our souls and 
the  satans  of  these  times,  and  they  will  not  again  be  the  cause  of  our  being  sent  to 
prison.”  So  in  the  face  of  this  request  of  the  Risale-i  Nur students  in  Denizli  Prison 
and the readers of the Sixth Topic, need arose for an explanatory summary of the pillar 
of  belief  in  the  hereafter,  as  well,  and  I  offered  them  a  brief  summary  of  various 
passages from the Risale-i Nur. 

In  the  Sixth  Topic  we  asked  the  heavens  and  the  earth  about  our  Creator,  and 
they described Him to us as clearly as the sun in the tongues of the sciences. Now, in 
the  same  way,  we  shall  ask  firstly  our  Sustainer,  Whom we have learnt about, about 
the  hereafter,  then  our  Prophet,  then  the  Qur’an,  then  the  other  prophets  and  holy 
scriptures, then the angels, and then the universe. 

In  the  first  stage,  we  ask  God  about  the  hereafter.  He  replies  through  all  the 
envoys  He  has  sent,  and  His  decrees,  and  all  His  Names  and  attributes:  “Yes,  the 
hereafter  exists,  and  I  shall  send  you  there.”  The  Tenth  Word  has  proved  and 
elucidated with twelve brilliant, decisive truths the  

                                             

9 Qur’an, 16:77. 
10 Qur’an, 31:28. 
11 Qur’an, 30:50. 

 

231

answers about the hereafter of a number of Names. Deeming those explanations to be 
sufficient, here we shall point them out briefly. 

Yes,  since  there  is  no  sovereignty  that  does  not  reward  those  who  obey  it  and 
punish  the  rebellious,  an  eternal  sovereignty  which  is  at  the  degree  of  absolute 
dominicality rewarding those who form a relation with it through belief and submit to 
its  decrees,  and  its  punishing  rebellious  disbelievers  who  deny  its  proud  sovereignty 
will  be  in  a  manner  fitting  for  its  mercy  and  beauty,  its  dignity  and  glory.  Thus, the 
Names Sustainer of All the Worlds and Just Monarch reply to our question. 

Also, we see as clearly as the sun, as daylight, a general mercy and all-embracing 
compassion  and  munificence  on  the face of the earth. For example, every spring that 
mercy  adorns all the fruit-bearing trees and plants like houris; it fills their hands with 
every sort of fruit and they hold them out to us, saying: “Help yourselves, and eat!” So 
does it give us sweet, healing honey to eat from the poisonous bee, and dresses us in 
the  softest  silk  by  means  of  a  handless  insect.  It  deposits  for  us  in  a  handful  of  tiny 
seeds  pounds  of  food,  making  those  tiny  stores  into  reserve  supplies.  Such  a  mercy 
and  compassion  surely  would  not  execute  these  lovable,  grateful,  worshipping 
believers  which  they  nurture  so  kindly.  They  rather dismiss them from their duties in 
this  worldly  life  to  bestow  on  them  still  more  brilliant  instances  of  mercy,  and  in  so 
doing the Names of All-Compassionate and Munificent answer our question. 

Also, we see before our eyes that a hand of wisdom works in all creatures on the 
face of the earth and a justice is in force with its measures, nothing superior to which 
the human mind can conceive of. For example, a pre-eternal wisdom inscribes in man’s 
faculty of memory, which is one instance of wisdom in his thousands of faculties and 
physical  systems  and  is  as  tiny  as  a  miniscule  seed,  his  entire  life-story  and  the 
numerous events which touch on him, making it into a small library. He then places it 
in  the  pocket  of  his  mind  as  a  note  from  the  register  of  his  actions  which  will  be 
published  for  his  judgement  at  the  Great  Gathering,  in  order  to  continuously  remind 
him of this. And an eternal justice places on all creatures their members with the finest 
balance, and makes all of them —from the microbe to the rhinoceros, and the fly to the 
simurgh  bird,  and  from  a  flowering  plant  to  the  flower  of  the  spring,  which  opens 
thousands of millions of flowers in the spring— with a beauty of art and balance with 
no waste within a mutual proportion, equilibrium, order and beauty; it gives all living 
creatures their rights of life with perfect balance, and makes good things produce good 
results  and  bad  things, bad results; and since the time of Adam it has made itself felt 
forcefully through the blows  

 

232

it  has  dealt  to  rebellious  and  tyrannous  peoples.  Certainly  and  without doubt, just as 
the  sun  cannot  be  without  the  day,  so  that  pre-eternal  wisdom  and  eternal  justice 
cannot  be  without  the  hereafter.  The  Names  of  All-Wise  and  Sapient,  Just  and 
Equitable  would  never  permit  the  awesome  injustice,  inequity,  and  unwisdom  of 
oppressed  and  oppressor  being  equal  in  death,  and  thus  they  decisively  answer  our 
question.  

Also, since whenever living creatures seek their natural wishes, which are beyond 
their power, through the tongues of their innate abilities and essential needs, which is 
supplication  of  a  sort,  all  their  needs  are  given  to  them  by  a  most  compassionate, 
hearing,  kind  unseen  hand;  and  since  six  or seven  out of ten of human supplications, 
which  are  voluntary,  especially those of the prophets and the elect, are accepted in a 
way contrary to the normal course of things; it is understood certainly that behind the 
veil of the Unseen is one who listens and hears the sighs of the suffering and prayers of 
the needy, and replies to them; he sees the least need of the smallest living being and 
compassionately  replying  by  action,  gratifies  it.  There  is  no  possibility  of  doubting 
therefore that the one who includes in his supplication all the most important, general 
supplications of man, the most important of creatures, which are connected with all the 
Divine Names and attributes and are for immortality; and takes behind him all the other 
prophets,  who  are  the  suns,  stars,  and  leaders  of  mankind,  making  them  exclaim: 
“Amen! Amen!”; and  for whom benedictions are recited several times every day; and 
to  whose  supplication  all  the  members  of  his  community  rejoin:  “Amen!  Amen!”, 
indeed,  in  whose  supplication  all  creatures  take  part,  saying:  “Yes,  O  Lord! Do give 
what  he  asks!  We  too  want  what  he  seeks!”  —  of  all  the  causes  necessitating 
resurrection  under  these  irresistible  conditions,  only  a  single  supplication  of 
Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him)  for  immortality  in  the  hereafter  and 
eternal happiness would have been sufficient reason for the existence of Paradise and 
creation  of  the  hereafter,  which  are  as  easy  for  Divine  power  as  the  creation  of  the 
spring  —  stating  this,  the  Names  of  Answerer  of  Prayer,  All-Hearing,  and  All-
Compassionate answer our question. 

Also, since as clearly as the sun is shown by daylight, behind the veil is One Who 
has disposal over the universal death and revivification in the alternation of the seasons 
on  the  earth;  and  a  pen  of  power  inscribes  the  mighty  globe  with  the  ease  and 
orderliness  of  a  garden  or  even  a  tree,  and  the  splendid  spring  with  the  facility  and 
symmetrical  adornment  of  a  flower,  and  the  species  of  plants  and  animals  as  though 
they were three hundred thousand books displaying three hundred thousand samples of 
resurrection, all one within the other and intermingled and mixed up  

 

233

together yet without disarrangement or disorder, all resembling each other yet without 
confusion, error, or fault; perfectly, regularly, and meaningfully; and since despite this 
vast  profusion  that  One  works  with  boundless  mercy  and  infinite  wisdom;  and  since 
He  has  subjugated,  decorated,  and  furnished  the  vast  universe  for  man  like  a  house, 
and appointing him vicegerent of the earth, committing to him the supreme trust, from 
the  bearing  of  which the mountains, sky, and earth shrank, and has raised him to the 
rank  of  commanding  officer  over  other  living  beings,  honoured  him  with  the  Divine 
address and conversation, and since He has thus bestowed on man this supreme station 
and in all the revealed decrees promised him eternal happiness and immortal life in the 
hereafter; certainly and without doubt He will open up that realm of bliss for ennobled 
and honoured man, which is as easy for His power as the spring, and bring about the 
resurrection of the dead and Last Judgement —stating this, the Names of Granter of 
Life and Dealer of Death, Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent, and All-Powerful and 
Knowing reply to the question we asked of our Creator. 

Yes,  if  one  considers  the  power  which  every  spring  raises  to  life  identically  the 
roots  of  all  the  trees  and  plants  and  creates  the  three  hundred  thousand  plant  and 
animal samples of the resurrection of the dead, and if one visualizes the thousand year 
period of each of the communities of Moses and Muhammad (Peace and blessings be 
upon  them),  and  they  are  pictured  in  the  imagination,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  two 
thousand  springs12  display  a  thousand  samples  of  resurrection  and  a  thousand 
evidences. It is to be blind and unreasonable a thousand times over to consider bodily 
resurrection difficult for such a power. 

Also,  just  as  relying  on  Almighty  God’s  thousands  of  promises,  the  twenty-four 
thousand  prophets,  who  are  the  most  renowned  of  mankind,  have  unanimously 
proclaimed and proved through their miracles that eternal happiness and immortality in 
the hereafter are true; so innumerable people of sainthood have put their signature to 
the  same  truth  through their illuminations and unfoldings. Since this is so, surely this 
truth is as clear as the sun, and those who doubt it are crazy. 

Yes, the ideas and judgements of one or two experts in a science or art concerning 
their  science  refute  the  opposing  ideas  of  ten  men  who  are  not  experts  in  it,  even  if 
they are experts in their own fields. Similarly, two people making a positive statement 
about a subject, for example, proving the crescent moon of Ramadan on the day it is 
uncertain, or claiming: “there is a garden on the earth where coconuts resembling cans 
of milk are grown” defeat a thousand deniers, and win the case. For the one  

                                             

12 It is as though Doomsday has occurred in all past springs and they have died, while the 

following springs have been their resurrections. 

 

234

making the positive statement has only to point out the place where the coconuts are 
found  to  easily  win.  Whereas  the  one  who  denies  it  can  prove  his  case  only  by 
searching the whole face of the earth and demonstrating that the coconuts are not to 
be found anywhere. So one who makes a report of Paradise and the realm of bliss and 
asserts  that  they  exist  wins  his  case  by  only  demonstrating  through  illumination  a 
shadow or distillation of it, like in the cinema, while those who deny it can only win by 
proving  their  denial  by  seeing  the  whole  universe  and  all  time  from  pre-eternity  to 
post-eternity, and demonstrating it. It is because of this that the investigative scholars 
have agreed on the rule “on condition they are not inherently impossible, denials which 
are  not  specific  but  look  to  the  whole  universe  like  the  truths  of  belief,  cannot  be 
proved,” and have accepted it as a fundamental principle. 

In  consequence  of  this  definite  truth,  while  the  opposing  ideas  of  thousands  of 
philosophers  should  not  cast  the  slightest  doubt,  or  even  suspicion,  on  even  a single 
truthful report concerning the questions of belief, you may understand what a lunacy it 
is  to  fall  into  doubt  at  the  denials  of  a  handful  of  philosophers  who  concerning  the 
pillars of belief understand no further than their eyes see, have no heart, are blind, and 
have  grown  distant  from  spiritual  matters.  For  the  pillars  of  faith  have  been  agreed 
upon by one hundred and twenty thousand expert scholars and truthful reporters with 
their  positive  assertions,  and  innumerable  specialists  in  the  field  of  reality  and 
investigative scholars.  

Also,  we  see  with  our  own  eyes  as  clearly  as  daylight  both  in  ourselves  and  all 
around us a comprehensive mercy and all-embracing wisdom and constant bestowal of 
grace.  We  observe  too  the  traces  and  manifestations  of  an  awesome  sovereignty  of 
dominicality, a precise and lofty justice, and a proud and glorious government. Indeed, 
the  wisdom  which  attaches  instances  of  wisdom  to  a  tree  to  the  number  of its  fruits 
and flowers; and the mercy which bestows bounties and favours on every human being 
to  the  number  of  his  faculties,  members,  and  feelings;  and  the  proud,  yet  gracious 
justice  which  deals  blows  at  rebellious  peoples  like  those  of  Noah,  Hud,  and  Salih 
(Peace be upon them) and the ‘Ad, Thamud, and people of Pharoah, and protects the 
rights of the least living being; and the verse: 

And among His signs is this, that heaven and earth stand by His command; 
then  when  He  calls  you,  by  a  single  call,  from  the  earth,  behold,  you 
[straightway] come forth13 

all state the following with a majestic conciseness: 

Just as at the summons of their commander and the sound of the bugle,  

                                             

13 Qur’an, 30:25. 

 

235

the  disciplined  soldiers  stationed  in  two  barracks  spring  to  arms  and  their  duties;  so 
whenever the bugle-call of Israfil (Peace be upon him) summons those lying in death in 
the vast heavens and in the earth, which are like two orderly barracks for the soldiers 
of the Pre-Eternal Monarch, obedient to His command, they will immediately don the 
uniforms  of  their  bodies  and  rise  up.  Proving  and  demonstrating  this  is  the  same 
situation  displayed  by  the  beings  in  the  barracks  of  the  earth  in  the  spring  at  the 
trumpet-blast of the Angel of Thunder, and from it is understood the infinite grandeur 
of  the  sovereignty  of  dominicality.  As  is  proved  in  the  Tenth  Word,  it  is  certainly 
therefore  utterly  impossible  that  the  realm  of  the  hereafter  and  arena  of  the 
resurrection and Great Gathering, which are most definitely demanded by that mercy, 
wisdom, grace, and justice, should not be inaugurated, and for that infinitely beautiful 
mercy to be transformed into ugly cruelty, and for that boundless perfection of wisdom 
to be turned into infinitely faulty futility and purposeless wastefulness, and that sweet 
grace  to  be  transformed  into  bitter  treachery,  and  that  finely  balanced  and  equitable 
justice to be turned into severe tyranny, and that utterly powerful and majestic eternal 
sovereignty  to  decline,  and  with  the  resurrection  not  occuring  for  it  to  lose  all  its 
splendour,  and  for  the  perfections  of  its  dominicality  to be marred by impotence and 
defect.  This  would  be  completely  unreasonable  and  a  compounded  impossibility, 
outside the bounds of possibility and false and precluded. 

For all those with intelligence would surely understand what a cruel unkindness it 
would be, having nurtured man so solicitously and given him through faculties like the 
heart  and  intellect  a  sense  of  longing  for  eternal  happiness  and  everlasting  life  in the 
hereafter, to despatch him to eternal non-being; and how contrary to wisdom it would 
be, having attached hundreds of purposes and instances of wisdom to only his brain, to 
waste  through  endless  death  all  his  faculties  and  his  abilities  with  their  thousands  of 
purposes  thus  making  them  devoid  of  all  use,  purpose  and  result;  and  how  utterly 
opposed to the splendour of that sovereignty and perfect dominicality it would be, by 
not  carrying  out  His  thousands  of  promises,  to  demonstrate  —God  forbid!—  His 
impotence and ignorance. You may make an analogy with these for grace and justice. 
Thus,  the  Names  of  Most  Merciful,  All-Just,  All-Wise,  Munificent,  and  Ruler 
answer  with the  above truths the question we asked our Creator about the hereafter, 
and prove it as indubitably and clearly as the sun. 

Moreover, we observe that prevailing over everything is a vast and comprehensive 
preservation which records in their seeds, on the tablets of the World of Similitudes, in 
their memories, which are tiny samples of the Preserved Tablet, and particularly in the 
faculty of memory, which is  

 

236

a tiny library in man’s brain which is at the same time very large, and in other mirrors, 
physical and non-physical, in which they are reflected, the numerous forms of all living 
creatures  and  all  things,  and  the  notebooks  of  the  duties  they  perform  in accordance 
with their essential natures, and the pages of their deeds pertaining to the glorifications 
they  perform  towards  the  Divine  Names  through  the  tongues  of  their  beings;  it 
inscribes  them in  these, and records and preserves them. Then, when the time comes 
—every  spring,  which  is  a  flower  of  Divine  power—  they  display  to  us  all  those 
immaterial  inscriptions  in  physical  form,  proclaim  to  the  universe  with  millions  of 
tongues  within  that  supreme  flower,  and  with  the  strength  of  millions  of  examples, 
evidences, and samples, the wondrous truth of resurrection expressed in the verse: 

When the pages are spread out.14  

It  proves  most  cogently  that  foremost  man,  and  all  living beings  and all things,  were 
created  not  to  topple  over  into  nothingness,  to  fall  into  non-existence,  to  be 
annihilated,  but  to  win  immortality  through  progressing,  and  permanence  through 
being purified, and to take up the eternal duties required by their innate capacities. 

Yes,  we  observe  every  spring  that  the  innumerable  plants  which  die  in  the 
doomsday of the autumn, and all the trees, roots, seeds, and grains in the resurrection 
of the spring recite the verse When the pages are spread out. Expounding each in its 
own  tongue  one  meaning  of  the  verse,  one facet of it, with examples of the duties it 
performed in previous years, they all testify to that vast preservation. They display in 
everything the four vast truths of the verse,  

He is the First, and the Last, the Evident, and the Inward,15  

and instruct us with the ease and certainty of the spring. 

The  manifestations  of  these  four  Names  occur  in  all  things  from  the  most 
particular to the most universal. For example, through manifesting the Name of First, 
a  seed,  the  source  of  a  tree,  is  a  precise  programme  of  it  and  a  small  receptacle 
containing  the  faultless  systems  of  the  tree’s  creation  and  all  the  conditions  of  its 
formation, thus proving the vastness of Divine preservation. 

Then, together with the tree’s seeds, its fruit manifests the Name of Last; they are 
coffers  containing  the  indexes  of  all  the  duties  the  tree  has  performed  in  accordance 
with its nature and the principles of its second life, thus testifying at a maximum level 
to Divine preservation. 

                                             

14 Qur’an, 81:10. 
15 Qur’an, 57:3. 

 

237

The  tree’s  physical  form,  which  manifests  the  Name  of  Evident,  is  a    finely 
proportioned,  skilfully  decorated  garment.  Like  a  seventy-hued  robe  of  the  houris 
which has been embroidered with gilded motifs, it demonstrates visibly the vast power, 
perfect wisdom, and beautiful mercy within Divine preservation. 

As for the machinery within the tree, which manifests the Name of Inward, it is a 
regular,  miraculous,  faultless  factory  and  workbench,  a  balanced  cauldron  of  food 
which  leaves  unnourished  none  of  its  branches,  fruits,  or  leaves,  thus  proving  as 
brilliantly as the sun the perfect power, justice, and beautiful mercy and wisdom within 
Divine preservation. 

Similarly,  in  respect  of  the  annual  seasons  the  globe  is  a  tree.  Through  the 
manifestation  of  the  Name  of  First,  all  the  seeds  and  grains  entrusted  to  Divine 
preservation  in  the  season  of  autumn  are  small  collections  of  the  Divine  commands 
concerning the formation of the tree of the face of the earth, which when it is enrobed 
in  the  garment  of  spring,  puts  forth  millions  of  branches  and  twigs,  and  fruits  and 
flowers.  So  too  those  seeds  are  lists  of  the  principles  proceeding  from  Divine 
Determining,  and  the  tiny  pages  of  the  tree’s  deeds  of the previous summer, and the 
notebooks of its tasks, which demonstrate self-evidently that they function through the 
infinite power, justice, wisdom, and mercy of a Glorious and Munificent Preserver. 

Then  the  end  of  the  annual  tree  of  the  earth  is  —in  the  second  autumn,  its 
depositing in those tiny containers all the duties it has performed, all the glorifications 
it  has  recited  before  the  Divine  Names  in  accordance  with  its  creation,  and  all  the 
pages  of  its  deeds  that  it  will  publish  the  following  resurrection  of  spring,—  its 
handing  them  over  to  the  hand  of  wisdom of the Glorious Preserver and reciting the 
Name of He is the Last before the whole universe in innumerable tongues. 

The evident face of the tree is, —by its opening three hundred thousand universal 
sorts  of  blossoms,  which  demonstrate  three  hundred  thousand  examples and signs of 
the resurrection of the dead; and its spreading out innumerable tables of mercifulness, 
providence,  compassionateness,  and  munificence;  and  its  offering  banquets  to  living 
beings,— its reciting the Name of He is the Evident with tongues to the number of its 
fruits, flowers, and foods, and offering praise and laudation, and showing as clearly as 
daylight the truth of When the pages are spread out. 

The inner face of this majestic tree is a cauldron and workbench running precisely 
and  in  orderly  fashion  incalculable  numbers  of  regular  machines  and  finely  balanced 
factories, which cook thousands of pounds of food out of one ounce and offer it to the 
hungry. It works with such  

 

238

precision and balance that it leaves no room for chance to interfere. Like some angels 
who glorify God with a thousand tongues, with the inner face of the earth it proclaims 
the Name of He is the Inward in a hundred thousand ways, and proves it. 

Just  as  in  respect  of  its  annual  life,  the  earth  is  a  tree  and  makes  the  Divine 
preservation within those four Names a key to the door of resurrection, so in respect 
of its worldly life, it is again a well-ordered tree, whose fruits are sent to the market of 
the hereafter. It is a place of manifestation of those four Names and mirror to them so 
broad,  and  road  leading  to  the  hereafter  so  lengthy,  our  minds  are  incapable  of 
comprehending and describing it; we can only say this much: 

As the hands of a weekly clock which count the seconds, minutes, hours, and days 
resemble  each  other  and  prove  each  other,  and  one  who  sees  the  movement  of  the 
second  hand  is  bound  to  assent  to  the  movement  of  the  others;  so  the  days,  which 
count the seconds of this world, which is a vast clock of the Glorious Creator of the 
Heavens  and  Earth,  and  the  years,  which  count  its  minutes,  and the  centuries, which 
show its hours, and the ages, which make known its days, all resemble and prove each 
other. So too the Name of Preserver and those of He is the First, and the Last, the 
Evident, and the Inward inform us through innumerable signs that as certainly as the 
morning of this night will come, and this winter’s spring, so will the everlasting spring 
and eternal morning come of the dark winter of this transitory world, thus answering 
with  the  above  truths  the  question  of  resurrection  concerning  which  we  asked  our 
Creator. 

Also,  since  we  see with our eyes and understand with  our minds that man is the 
final  and  most  comprehensive  fruit  of  the  tree  of  the  universe..  and  in  respect  of the 
Muhammadan (Peace and blessings be upon him) Reality is its original seed.. and the 
supreme  sign  of  the  Qur’an  of  the  universe..  and  he  is  its  Throne  Verse  bearing  the 
Greatest Name.. and the most honoured guest in the palace of the universe.. the most 
active  functionary  empowered  over  the  other  inhabitants  of  the  palace..  the  official 
charged with overseeing the income and expenditure, and the planting and cultivation 
of  the  gardens  in  the  quarter  of  the  earth  in  the  city  of  the  universe.. and is its  most 
noisy  and  responsible  minister,  equipped  with  hundreds  of sciences and thousands of 
arts.. and an inspector and sort of vicegerent of the Monarch of Pre-Eternity and Post-
Eternity,  under  His  close  scrutiny,  in  the  region  of  the  earth  in  the  country  of  the 
universe.. and one with disposal over it whose actions, particular and universal, are all 
recorded.. who has undertaken the Supreme Trust, from which the heavens and earth 
and  mountains  shrank..  and  before  whom  are  two  roads,  on  one  of  which  he  is  the 
most wretched of living beings, and on  

 

239

the  other,  the  most  fortunate..  and  he  is  a  universal  bondsman  charged  with  most 
extensive worship.. the place of manifestation of the Greatest Name of the Monarch of 
the universe and a comprehensive mirror of all His Names.. a special addressee of His, 
with the best understanding of His Divine addresses and speech.. the most needy of the 
living  beings  of  the  universe..  and  is a wretched living creature who has innumerable 
desires  and  goals,  numberless  enemies  and  things  that  harm  him,  despite  his  infinite 
poverty and impotence.. is the richest in regard to abilities and potentialities.. the most 
suffering  in  respect  of  the  pleasures  of  life,  whose  enjoyment  is  marred  by  ghastly 
pains..  and  a  wondrous  miracle  of  the  power  of  the  Eternally  Besought  One  and 
marvel of Divine power who is the most needy and wanting, and worthy and deserving 
of immortality, and seeks and beseeches eternal happiness with endless prayers, and if 
all the pleasures of this world were given him, his desire for immortality would not be 
satisfied,  and  who  loves  to  the  degree  of  worshipping  Him  the  One  Who  bestows 
bounties on him, and makes Him loved and is loved.. and all of whose faculties, which 
encompass the universe, testify that he was created to go to eternity.. and through the 
above twenty universal truths is bound to Almighty God’s Name of Truth; and whose 
actions are continuously recorded by the All-Glorious Preserver’s Name of Preserver, 
Who  sees  the  most  insignificant  need  of  the  tiniest  animate  being,  hears  it  plaint and 
responds  in  action;  and  being  related  to  the  whole  universe  whose  deeds are  written 
down  by the “noble scribes” of that Name and who more than anything else receives 
its attention..  

As  required  by  the  above  twenty  truths,  most  certainly  and  without  any  doubt 
there will be a resurrection and judgement for man, and in accordance with the Name 
of  Truth,  he  will  receive  reward  for  his  above  duties  and  punishment  for  his  faults, 
and  in  accordance  with  the  Name  of  Preserver,  he  will  be  questioned  and  called  to 
account for his actions, all of which have been recorded, and the doors will be opened 
of the feasting halls of everlasting bliss in the eternal realm, and of the prison of eternal 
misery; man, who has been an officer with command over numerous species of beings 
in this world, and has intervened in them and sometimes thrown them into confusion, 
will not enter the soil never to be questioned concerning his actions, nor lay down in 
concealment not to be roused. For to hear the buzz of the fly and to answer it actively 
by giving it its rights of life, and not to hear the prayers for eternity made through the 
tongues  of  the  above  twenty  truths  of  innumerable  human  rights  which  reverberate 
through the heavens and earth like thunder, and to transgress all those rights, and for a 
wisdom which as is testified  to by the order of the fly’s wing wastes not even such a 
wing, to waste utterly man’s abilities, which  

 

240

are bound by those truths, and his hopes and desires, which reach out to eternity, and 
the  many  bonds  and  truths  of  the  universe  which  nourish  those  abilities  and  desires, 
would  be  such  an  injustice  and  so  impossible  and  such  a  tyrannical  ugliness  that  all 
beings  which  testify  to  the  Names  of  Truth,  Preserver,  All-Wise,  All-Beauteous, 
and  All-Compassionate reject it, declaring it to be utterly impossible and precluded. 
Thus, in reply to our question to our Creator about resurrection, the Names of Truth, 
Preserver,  All-Wise,  All-Beauteous,  and  All-Compassionate,  say:  “Just  as  we  are 
truth  and  reality,  and  the  beings  that  testify  to  us  are  true, so the resurrection of the 
dead is true and certain.” 

And since... I was going to write more, but since the above is as clear as the sun, I 

have curtailed the discussion. 

Thus,  making  an  analogy  with  the  matters  in  the  above  examples  and  “sinces,” 
through  their  manifestations  and  reflections  in  beings,  all  Almighty  God’s  hundred, 
indeed a thousand, Names which look to the universe prove self-evidently the one they 
signify;  so  too  do  they  demonstrate  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  and  hereafter,  and 
prove them definitively. 

Also, just as through all His decrees and the scriptures He has revealed and most 
of  His  Names,  by  which  he  is  described,  our  Sustainer  gives  us  sacred  and  decisive 
answers to the question we asked our Creator; so He causes it to be answered through 
His angels, and in another fashion through their tongue: 

“There have been hundreds of incidents unanimously attested to since the time of 
Adam of your meeting both with spirit beings and with us, and there are innumerable 
signs  and  evidences  of  our  existence  and  worship  and  that  of  the  spirit  beings.  In 
agreement  with  each  other,  we  have  told  your  leaders  when  we  have  met  with  them 
that we travel through the halls of the hereafter and in some of its apartments, and we 
always say this. We have no doubt that the fine, eternal halls that we have wandered 
through,  and  the  well-appointed  decorated  palaces  and  dwellings  beyond  them  await 
important guests, in order to accommodate them. We give you certain news of this.” 
They reply to our question thus. 

Also,  since  our  Creator  appointed  Muhammad  the  Arabian  (Peace  and  blessings 
be  upon  him)  as  the  greatest  teacher,  best  master,  and  truest  guide,  who  is  neither 
confused  nor  confuses,  and  sent  him  as  His  last  envoy,  before  anything,  in  order  to 
progress and advance from the degree of ‘knowledge of certainty’ to those of ‘vision 
of certainty’ and ‘absolute certainty,’ we should ask this master the question we asked 
of our Creator. For just as that Being, through his thousand miracles, which were a  

 

241

mark  of  our  Creator’s  confirmation,  and  as  a  miracle  of  the  Qur’an,  proved  that the 
Qur’an is true and God’s Word; so, through its forty aspects of miraculousness,  as a 
miracle of his, the Qur’an proves that he was true and God’s Messenger. The reality of 
resurrection  which  they  prove  —one,  the  tongue  of  the  Manifest  World,  claimed  it 
throughout his life, confirmed by all the prophets and saints, and the other, the tongue 
of the World of the Unseen, claims it with thousands of its verses, confirmed by all the 
revealed scriptures and truths of the universe,— is as certain as the sun and daylight. 

Yes, a question like resurrection, which is the most strange and awesome matter 
and  beyond  the  reason,  could  only  be  solved  through  the  instruction  of  two  such 
wondrous masters, and understood. 

The reason the early prophets did not explain resurrection in detail like the Qur’an 
was that at that time mankind was still at a primitive stage of nomadism. There is little 
detailed explanation in preliminary instruction. 

And since the angels inform us that they have seen the hereafter and the dwellings 
of  the  eternal  realm,  evidences  testifying  to  the  existence  and  worship  of  the  angels, 
spirits, and spirit beings, are also indirect evidence for the existence of the hereafter. 

And  since  after  Divine  unity  the  thing Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon 
him)  most  constantly  claimed  and  asserted  throughout  his  life  was  the  hereafter, 
certainly  all  his  miracles  and  proofs which point  to his messengership and veracity in 
one way testify indirectly to the existence of the hereafter and that it will come. 

And since one quarter of the Qur’an is about resurrection and the hereafter and it 
tries to prove it with thousands of its verses, and gives news of it, all the proofs and 
evidences of the Qur’an’s veracity prove indirectly the existence of the hereafter, and 
its being thrown open. 

Now see how firm and certain is this pillar of belief! 

 

242

A Summary of the Eighth Topic 

 [In  the  Seventh  Topic,  we  questioned  numerous  levels  of  beings  about  the 
resurrection of the dead, but curtailed the discussion because since the replies 
given  by  the  Creator’s  Names  afforded such powerful certainty, they left  no 
need for further questions. Now in this Topic are summarized a hundredth of 
the  benefits  of  belief  in  the  hereafter,  including  those  which  result  in 
happiness in this world and in the next. The Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition 
leaves  no  need  for  further  explanation  concerning  the  happiness  of  the 
hereafter, so we refer the subject to the Qur’an. And leaving the explanations 
of worldly happiness to the Risale-i Nur, here we shall describe in summary 
form three or four out  of hundreds  of  results of belief in the hereafter which 
look to man’s individual life and social life.] 

The  First 

Just as, contrary to other living beings, man has relations with his home, so he has 
relations with the world, and just as he has relations with his relatives, so by nature he 
has  earnest  relations  with  mankind.  And  just  as  he  desires  temporary  permanence  in 
this world, so he passionately desires immortality in the realm of eternity. And just as 
he  strives  to  meet  the  need  of  his  stomach  for food, so he is by nature compelled to 
strive to provide for the stomachs of his mind, heart, spirit, and humanity. He has such 
hopes  and  desires  that  nothing  apart  from  eternal  happiness  can  satisfy  them.  As  is 
mentioned  in  the  Tenth  Word,  even,  when  small,  I  asked  my  imagination:  “Do  you 
want to live for a million years and rule the world but then cease to exist, or to live for 
ever but have an ordinary and difficult existence?” I saw that my imagination wanted 
the latter, feeling pain at the first, and said: “I want to live for ever, even if in Hell!”  

Thus,  since  the  pleasures  of  this  world  do  not  satisfy  the  imaginative  faculty, 
which is a servant of human nature, man’s comprehensive nature is certainly attached 
to eternity. For man, therefore, who despite being afflicted with these boundless hopes 
and  desires  as  capital  has  only  an  insignificant  faculty  of  will  and  absolute  poverty, 
belief in the hereafter is a treasury of such strength and sufficiency; is such a means of 
pleasure and happiness, source of help, refuge, and means of consolation in the  

 

243

face of the endless sorrows of this world, and is such a fruit and benefit that if the life 
of this world were to be sacrificed on the way of gaining it, it would still be cheap. 

Its second fruit and benefit, which looks to man’s personal life 

This is a consequence of great importance which is explained in the Third Topic, 

and about which is a footnote in A Guide For Youth. 

Man’s  greatest  and  most  constant  anxiety  is  his  entering  the  place  of  execution 
that  is  the  graveyard,  the  same  as his friends and relations have entered it. Wretched 
man, who is ready to sacrifice his very soul for a single friend, thinks of the thousands, 
millions, or thousands of millions of friends who have been eliminated and have parted 
for  all  eternity,  and  suffers  torments  worse  than  Hell.  Just  at  that  point  belief  in the 
hereafter comes, opens his eyes, and raises the veil. It tells him: “Look!” He looks with 
belief, and seeing that those friends have been saved from eternal death and decay and 
are awaiting him happily in a luminous world, he receives a pleasure of the spirit that 
intimates the pleasures of Paradise.  Sufficing with the explanations and proofs of this 
consequence in the Risale-i Nur, we cut this short here. 

A third benefit pertaining to personal life 

Man’s superiority over other living beings  and his high rank are in respect of his 
elevated qualities, comprehensive abilities, universal worship, and his extensive spheres 
of  existence.  However,  the  virtues  he  acquires  like  zeal,  love,  brotherhood,  and 
humanity are to the extent of the fleeting present, which is squeezed between the past 
and the future, which are both non-existent, and dead, and black. 

For  example,  he  loves  and  serves  his  father,  brother,  wife,  nation,  and  country, 
whom he formerly did not know and after parting from them, will never see again. He 
would very rarely be able to achieve complete loyalty and sincerity, and his virtues and 
perfections  would  diminish  proportionately.  Then,  just  as  because  of  his  intelligence, 
he  is  about  to  fall  headlong  from  being  the  highest of  the  animals  to  the  lowest  and 
most wretched, belief in the hereafter comes to his assistance. It expands the present, 
as constricting as the grave, so that it encompasses the past and future and is as broad 
as the world, and shows the bounds of existence to stretch from pre-eternity to post-
eternity. Thinking of his father being in the realm of bliss and world of spirits and the 
fraternity  of  his  brothers  continuing  to  eternity,  and  knowing  that  his  wife  will  be  a 
beautiful  companion  in  Paradise  also,  he  will  love  and  respect  them,  be  kindly  and 
assist them. He will not exploit the important duties which are for  

 

244

relationships in that broad sphere of life and existence for the worthless matters of this 
world,  with  its  petty  hatreds  and  interests.  His  good  qualities  and  attainments  will 
advance to the degree he is successful in being earnestly loyal and truly sincere, and his 
humanity  will  increase.  Although  he  does  not  receive  the  pleasure  from  life  that  a 
sparrow  receives,  he  becomes  the  most  eminent  and  happy  guest  in  the  universe, 
superior  to  all  the  animals,  and  the  best  loved  and  most  acceptable  servant  of  the 
universe’s  Owner.  This  consequence  has  also  been  elucidated  with  proofs  in  the 
Risale-i Nur, so here we suffice with this. 

A fourth benefit of belief in the hereafter, which looks to man’s social life 
A summary of this result is set forth in the Ninth Ray of the Risale-i Nur, it is as 

follows: 

Children,  which  form  a  quarter  of  mankind,  can  live  a  human  existence  only 
through  belief  in  the  hereafter, and sustain their human capacity.  They otherwise live 
only  childish,  empty  existences,  blunting  their  grievous  pains  with  trifling  playthings. 
For the effect of the constant deaths around them of children like themselves on their 
sensitive minds, and weak hearts which in the future will nurture far-reaching desires, 
and  their  vulnerable  spirits,  makes  their  minds  and  lives  into  instruments  of  torture. 
But then, through instruction in belief in the hereafter, in place of their anxieties, and 
the playthings behind which they hid so as not to see those deaths, they feel a joy and 
expansion, and say: “My brother or my friend has died and become a bird in Paradise. 
He is flying around and enjoying himself better than we are. And my mother has died, 
but she has gone to Divine mercy. She will again take me into her embrace in Paradise 
and I shall see her again.” They may live in a state befitting humanity. 

It  is  only  in  belief  in  the  hereafter  that  the  elderly,  who  form  another quarter  of 
mankind, can find consolation, in the face of the close extinction of their lives and their 
entering  the  soil,  and  their  fine  and  lovable  worlds  coming  to  an  end.  Those  kindly, 
venerable fathers and devoted, tender mothers would otherwise feel such a disturbance 
of the spirit and tumult of the heart that the world would become a despairing prison 
for  them  and  life,  a  ghastly  torture.  But  then  belief  in  the  hereafter  says  to  them: 
“Don’t  worry!  You  have  an  immortal  youth;  a  shining,  endless  life  awaits  you.  You 
will  be  joyfully  reunited  with the  children  and  relatives  you  have  lost.  All  your  good 
deeds  have  been  preserved  and  you  will  receive  your  reward.”  It  affords  them  such 
solace  and  joy  that  were  they  to  experience  old  age  a  hundred  times  over  all  at  the 
same time, it would not cause them despair. 

 

245

One  third  of mankind is formed by the youth. With their  turbulent emotions, the 
youths are not always able to control their bold intelligences and are overcome by their 
passions. If then they lose their faith in the hereafter and do not recall the torments of 
Hell,  it  puts  in  danger  the  property  and  honour  of  the  upright  people  in society, and 
the  peace  and  self-respect  of  the  weak  and  elderly.  One  youth  may  destroy  the 
happiness  of  a  contented  home  for  one  minute’s  pleasure,  then  pay  the  penalty  in 
prison for four or five years, degenerating into a wild animal. If belief in the hereafter 
comes  to  his  assistance  and  he  swiftly  comes  to  his  senses,  saying:  “It’s  true  the 
government  informers  can’t  see  me  and  I  can  hide  from  them,  but  the  angels  of  a 
Glorious  Monarch  who  has  a  prison  like  Hell  see  me  and  are  recording  all  my  evil 
deeds. I am not free and independent; I am a traveller charged with duties. One day I 
too will be old and weak.” He suddenly starts to feel a sympathy and respect for those 
he wanted to cruelly assault. This too is explained with proofs in the Risale-i Nur, so 
deeming that sufficient, we here cut it short. 

Another  important  section  of  mankind  are  the  sick,  the  oppressed,  the  disaster-
stricken like us, the poor and the life prisoners; if belief in the hereafter does not come 
to  their  aid,  death,  of  which  they  are  continuously  reminded  by  illness,  unavenged 
wrongs,  the  arrogant  treachery  of  the  oppressor,  from  whom  they  cannot  save  their 
honour,  the  terrible  despair  of  having  lost  their  property  or  children  in  serious 
disasters,  the  distress  at  having  to  suffer  the  torments  of  prison  for  five  or  ten  years 
because of a minute or two, or an hour or two, of pleasure — these surely make the 
world into a prison for such unfortunates, and life into agonizing torment. But if belief 
in the hereafter comes to their assistance, they suddenly breathe freely, and according 
to  the  degree  of  their  belief,  their  distress,  despair,  anxiety,  anger,  and  desire  for 
vengeance abate, sometimes partially, sometimes entirely. 

I  can  even  say  that  if  belief  in  the  hereafter  had  not  helped  me  and  some  of  my 
brothers  in  this  fearsome  calamity  of our  being  imprisoned  for  no  reason,  to  stand it 
for  one  day  would  have  been  as  grievous  as  death  and  driven  us  to  resign  from  life. 
But  endless  thanks  be  to  God,  despite  suffering  the  distress  of  my  brothers,  whom  I 
love as much as my life, as well as my own, in addition to the weeping and sorrow of 
thousands  of  copies  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  my  gilded,  decorated,  valuable  books, 
which I love as much as my eyes, and although I could never stand the slightest insult 
or  to  be  dominated,  I  swear  that  the  light  and  strength  of  belief  in  the  hereafter 
afforded  me  the  patience,  endurance,  solace,  and  steadfastness;  indeed,  it  filled  me 
with  enthusiasm  to  gain  greater  reward  in  the  profitable,  instructive  exertions  of  this 
ordeal, for as  

 

246

I said at the beginning of this treatise, I knew myself to be in a good medrese or school 
worthy of the title of ‘Medrese-i Yusufiye’ (School of Joseph). If it were not for  the 
occasional  sickness  and  irritability  arising  from  old  age,  I  would  have  worked  at  my 
lessons even better and with greater ease of mind. However, we have strayed from the 
subject; I hope it will be forgiven. 

Also,  everyone’s  home  is  a  small  world  for  him,  and  even  a  small  Paradise.  If 
belief in the hereafter is not at the basis of the happiness of that home, the members of 
the family will suffer anguish and anxiety to the extent of their compassion, love, and 
attachment.  Their  paradise  will either turn into Hell, or it will numb their minds with 
amusements and dissipation. Like the ostrich, who sees the hunter but can neither fly 
nor escape and sticks its head in the sand so as not to be seen, they plunge their heads 
into heedlessness so that death, decline, and separation do not spot them. They find a 
way  out  by  temporarily  blocking  out  their  feelings  in  lunatic  fashion.  Because,  for 
example,  the  mother  trembles  constantly  at  seeing  her children, for whom she would 
sacrifice her soul, exposed to dangers. While the children all the time feel sorrow and 
fear  at being unable to save their father and brother from unceasing calamities. Thus, 
in  the  upheavals  of  this  worldly  life,  the  supposedly  happy  life  of  the  family loses its 
happiness  in  many  respects,  and  the  relations  and  closeness  in  this  brief  life  do  not 
result in true loyalty, heartfelt sincerity, disinterested service and love. Good character 
declines proportionately, and is even lost. Whereas if belief in the hereafter enters that 
home,  it  illuminates  it  completely,  and  its  members  have  sincere  respect,  love,  and 
compassion for each other, are loyal and disregard each other’s faults, in the measure 
not  of  their  relations,  closeness,  kindness,  and  love  in  this  brief  life,  but  of  their 
continuation  in  the  realm  of  the  hereafter,  in  everlasting  happiness,  and  their  good 
character increases accordingly. The happiness of true humanity starts to unfold in that 
home.  Since  this  too  is  elucidated  with  proofs  in  the  Risale-i  Nur,  we  cut  this  short 
here. 

Towns are also households for their inhabitants. If belief in the hereafter does not 
govern  among  the  members  of  that  large  family  vices  like  malice,  self-interest,  false 
pretences,  selfishness,  artificiality,  hypocrisy,  bribery,  and  deception  will  dominate, 
displacing  sincerity,  cordiality,  virtue,  zeal,  self-sacrifice,  seeking  God’s  pleasure  and 
the  reward  of  the  hereafter,  which  are  bases  of  good conduct  and morality. Anarchy 
and  savagery will govern under the superficial order and humanity, poisoning the life 
of the town. The children will become troublemakers, the youth will take to drink, the 
strong will embark on oppression, and the elderly start to weep. 

 

247

By analogy, the country is also a household, and the fatherland, the home of the 
national  family.  If  belief  in  the  hereafter  rules  in  these  broad  homes,  true  respect, 
earnest  compassion,  disinterested  love,  mutual  assistance,  honest  service  and  social 
relations,  unhypocritical charity, virtue, modest greatness, and excellence will all start 
to develop. 

It  says  to  the  children:  “Give  up  messing  around;  there  is  Paradise  to be won!”, 

and teaches them self-control through instruction in the Qur’an. 

It  says  to  the  youth:  “There  is  Hell-fire;  give  up  your  drunkenness!”,  and brings 

them to their senses. 

makes them bow to justice. 

It says to the oppressor: “There is severe torment; you will receive a blow!”, and 

It  says  to  the  elderly:  “Awaiting  you  is  everlasting  happiness in  the hereafter far 
greater  than  all  the  happiness  you  have  lost  here,  and  immortal  youth;  try  to  win 
them!” It turns their tears into laughter. 

It  shows  its  favourable  effects  in  every  group,  particular  and  universal,  and 
illuminates them. The sociologists and moralists, who are concerned with the social life 
of  mankind,  should  take  special  note.  If  the  rest  of  the  thousands  of  benefits  and 
advantages of belief in the hereafter are compared with the five or six we have alluded 
to,  it  will  be  understood  that  it  is  only  belief  that  is  the  means  of  happiness  in  this 
world and the next, and in the lives of both. 

Deeming  sufficient  the  powerful  replies  to  the  frail  doubts  concerning  bodily 
resurrection described in the Twenty-Eighth Word of the Risale-i Nur and in others of 
its treatises, we merely make the following brief indication: 

The  most  comprehensive  mirror  of  the  Divine  Names  lies  in  corporeality.  The 
richest and most active centre of the Divine aims in the creation of the universe lies in 
corporeality.  The  greatest  variety  of  the  multifarious  dominical  bounties  lies  in 
corporeality. The greatest multiplicity of the seeds of the supplications and thanks man 
offers  to  his Creator through the tongues of his needs again lies in corporeality. And 
the  greatest  diversity  of  the  seeds  of  the  non-physical  and  spirit  worlds  also  lies  in 
corporeality. 

By  analogy  with  this,  since  hundreds  of  universal  truths  are  centred  in 
corporeality, in order to multiply corporeality and make it manifest the above truths on 
the  face  of  the  earth,  with  awesome activity and speed, the All-Wise  Creator clothes 
the successive caravans of beings in existence and sends them to that exhibition. Then 
he discharges them and  

 

248

sends others in their place, constantly making the factory of the universe run. Weaving 
corporeal products, He makes the earth into a seed-bed of the hereafter and Paradise. 
In fact, in order to gratify man’s physical stomach, he listens to and accepts the prayer 
for  immortality his stomach makes through the tongue of disposition, affording it the 
greatest  importance,  and  in  order  to  answer  it,  prepares  in  corporeality  incalculable 
numbers  of  innumerable  sorts  and  kinds  of  artistic  foods  and  precious  bounties,  all 
affording different pleasures. This demonstrates self-evidently and without doubt that 
in  the  hereafter,  the  most  numerous  and  various  of  the  pleasures  of  Paradise  will  be 
corporeal,  and  that  the  bounties  of  the  eternal  abode  of  bliss,  which  everyone  wants 
and is familiar with, will be corporeal. 

Is  it  at  all  possible  that  the  Most  Compassionate  All-Powerful  One,  the  All-
Knowing  and  Munificent One, Who accepts the prayer offered through the tongue of 
disposition  by  the  common  stomach,  and  gratifying  it  with  infinitely  miraculous 
physical  foods,  always  replies  in  fact,  intentionally  and  without  chance,  would  not 
accept the numerous, general prayers of man —who is the most important result of the 
universe,  the  Divine  vicegerent  on  earth,  and  the  Creator’s  choice  being  and 
worshipper— which he offers through the supreme stomach of humanity for universal, 
elevated  corporeal  pleasures  in  the  eternal  realm,  which  he  always  desires  and  with 
which he is familiar and which by nature he wants; that He should not respond in fact 
with bodily resurrection, and not gratify him eternally? Should He hear the buzz of the 
fly,  and  not  hear  the  crashing  thunder?  Should  He  equip  a  common  soldier  to 
perfection,  and  ignore  the  army,  giving  it  no  importance?  To  do  so  would  be 
impossible and absurd. 

Yes, in accordance with the explicit statement of the verse: 

There  will  be  there  all  that  the  souls  could  desire,  all  that  the  eyes  could 
delight in,16  

man will experience in Paradise in fitting form the physical pleasures with which he is 
most  familiar  and  samples  of  which  he  has  tasted  in this  world.  The  rewards  for  the 
sincere  thanks  and  particular  worship  each  of  his  members, like the tongue, eye, and 
ear, offers, will be given through physical pleasures particular to those members. The 
Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  describes  the  physical  pleasures  so  explicitly,  it  is 
impossible not to accept the apparent meaning, and to make forced interpretations of 
them. 

The fruits and results of belief in the hereafter, then, show that just as the reality 

and needs of the stomach, one of the human members, are  

                                             

16 Qur’an, 43:71. 

 

249

decisive evidence for the existence of food; so the reality and perfections of man, and 
his  innate  needs  and  desire  for  eternity,  and  his  abilities  and  potentialities,  which 
demand the above-mentioned consequences and benefits of belief in the hereafter, are 
certain evidence for the hereafter and Paradise and eternal physical pleasures, and they 
testify to their certain existence. Similarly, the reality of the universe’s perfections and 
its  meaningful  creational  signs,  and  all  its  truths  connected  with  the  above  human 
truths  are  evidence  for  the  certain  existence  of  the  realm  of  the  hereafter,  the 
resurrection of the dead, and the opening up of Heaven and Hell. This has been proved 
so  brilliantly  in  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  particularly  in  the  Tenth,  Twenty-Eighth  (both 
Stations),  and  Twenty-Ninth  Words,  and  the  Ninth  Ray,  and  the  Supplication  of  the 
Third Ray, that they leave no room for doubt. Referring readers to them, we cut short 
this long story here. 

The Qur’anic descriptions of Hell are also so clear and explicit they leave no need 
for further description. Only, referring to the Risale-i Nur detailed explanation of one 
or  two  points  which  dispel  one  or  two  flimsy  doubts,  we  shall  set  forth  a  very  brief 
summary. 

F i r s t   P o i n t : The thought of Hell and the fear it induces does not dispel the 
pleasures of the above fruits of belief. For boundless Divine mercy says to the fearful 
man:  Come  to  me!  Enter  the  door  of  repentance,  then  the  existence  of Hell  will  not 
frighten  you,  but  make  known  completely the  pleasures  of  Paradise,  and avenge you 
and all creatures whose rights have been transgressed, and give you enjoyment. If you 
are so submerged in misguidance you cannot extricate yourself, the existence of Hell is 
still immeasurably better than eternal annihilation, and is also a sort of kindness for the 
disbelievers.  For  man,  and  even  animals  with  young,  receive  pleasure  at  the pleasure 
and happiness of their relatives, offspring, and friends, and in one respect are happy. 

Therefore,  O  atheist!  Because  of  your  misguidance,  you  will  either  tumble  into 
non-being  at  your  eternal  execution,  or  you  will  enter  Hell!  As  for  non-existence, 
which is absolute evil, since it consists of the annihilation together with yourself of all 
your relatives, forbears and descendants, whom you love and at whose happiness you 
are  to  an  extent  happy,  it  causes  pain  to  your  spirit,  heart,  and  inner  nature  severer 
than a thousand Hells. For if there was no Hell, there would be no Paradise. Through 
your disbelief, everything falls into non-existence. If you go to Hell and remain within 
the sphere of existence, those you love and your relatives will be happy in Paradise, or 
will be the recipients of compassion in some respects within the spheres of existence. 
This means you should support  

 

250

the idea of Hell existing. To oppose it is to support non-existence, which is to support 
the elimination of innumerable friends’ happiness. 

Yes, Hell is an awesome, majestic, existent land which performs the wise and just 
function of being the place of incarceration of the Glorious Sovereign of the sphere of 
existence,  which  is  pure  good.  It  performs  numerous  other  functions, besides that of 
prison,  and  fulfils  many  purposes  and  carries  out  many  duties  connected  with  the 
eternal  realm.  It  is  also  the  awe-inspiring  habitation  of  many  living  creatures  like the 
Angels of Hell. 

S  e  c  o  n  d      P  o  i  n  t  :  There  is  no  contradiction  between  the  existence  and 
ghastly torments of Hell, and infinite mercy, true justice, and wisdom with its balance 
and absence of waste. Indeed, mercy, justice, and wisdom require its existence. For to 
punish  a  tyrant  who  tramples  the  rights  of  a  thousand  innocents  and  to  kill  a  savage 
animal  who  tears  to  pieces  a  hundred  cowed  animals,  is  for  the  oppressed  a 
thousandfold  mercy  within  justice.  While  to  pardon  the  tyrant  and  leave  the  savage 
beast free, is for hundreds of wretches a hundredfold pitilessness in place of that single 
act of misplaced mercy. 

Similarly, among those who will enter Hell is the absolute disbeliever. For through 
his  disbelief  and  denial  he  both  transgresses  the  rights  of  the  Divine  Names,  and 
through denying the testimony of beings to those Names, he transgresses their rights, 
and  by  denying  the  elevated  duties  of  glorification  of  creatures  before  the  Divine 
Names  he  violates  their  rights,  and  through  denying  their  being  mirrors  to  and 
responding  with  worship  to  the  manifestation  of  Divine  dominicality,  which  is  the 
purpose  of  the  universe’s  creation and  a reason for its existence and continuance, he 
transgresses their rights in a way. His disbelief is therefore a crime and wrong of such 
vast proportions it may not be forgiven, and deserves the threat of the verse, 
God forgives not [the sin of] joining other gods with Him.17 

Not  to  cast  him  into  Hell  would  comprise  innumerable  instances  of  mercilessness  to 
innumerable  claimants  whose  rights  had  been  transgressed,  in  place  of  a  single 
misplaced  act  of  mercy.  Just  as  those  claimants  demand  the  existence  of  Hell, so  do 
Divine dignity and majesty, and tremendousness and perfection most certainly demand 
it. 

Yes,  if  a  worthless  rebel  who  assaults  the  people  says  to  the  proud  ruler  of  the 
place: “You can’t  put me in prison!”, affronting his dignity, if there is not a prison in 
the town, the ruler will have one made just to throw the ill-mannered wretch into it. In 
just the same way, through his  

                                             

17 Qur’an, 4:48, 116. 

 

251

disbelief  the  absolute  disbeliever  affronts  seriously  the  dignity  of  Divine  glory,  and 
through  his  denial  offends  the  splendour  of  His  power,  and  through  his  aggression 
disturbs  the  perfection  of  His  dominicality.  Even  if  there  were  not  many  things 
necessitating the functions of Hell and many reasons for and instances of wisdom in its 
existence, it is the mark of that dignity and glory to create a Hell for disbelievers such 
as that, and to cast them into it. 

Moreover, even the nature of disbelief makes known Hell. Yes, just as if the true 
nature of belief was to be embodied, it could with its pleasures take on the form of a 
private paradise, and in this respect gives secret news of Paradise; so, as is proved with 
evidences  in  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  is  also  alluded  to in the previous Topics, disbelief, 
and especially absolute disbelief, and dissembling, and apostasy, are the cause of such 
dark  and  awful  pains  and  spiritual  torment  that  if  they  were  to  be  embodied,  they 
would become a private Hell for the apostate, and in this way tell of the greater Hell in 
concealed manner. The tiny truths in the seed-bed of this world produce shoots in the 
hereafter.  Thus,  this  poisonous  seed  indicates  that particular tree of Zaqqum, saying: 
“I  am  its  origin.  For  the  unfortunate  who  bears  me  in  his  heart,  my  fruit  is  a private 
sample of that Zaqqum-tree.” 

Since  disbelief  is  aggression  against  innumerable  rights,  it  is  certainly  an  infinite 
crime and deserves infinite punishment. Human justice considers a sentence of fifteen 
years  imprisonment  (nearly  eight  million  minutes)  to  be  justice  for  a  one  minute’s 
murder,  and  conformable  with  general  rights  and  interests.  Therefore,  since  one 
instance  of  disbelief  is  the  equivalent  of  a  thousand  murders,  to  suffer  torments  for 
nearly  eight  thousand  million  minutes  for  one  minute’s  absolute  disbelief,  is  in 
conformity with that law of justice. A person who passes a year of his life in disbelief 
deserves  punishment  for  close  on  two  million  million  eight  hundred  eighty  thousand 
million minutes, and manifests the meaning of the verse, 

They will dwell therein for ever.18  

However... 

The  All-Wise  Qur’an’s  miraculous  descriptions  of  Heaven  and  Hell,  and  the 
proofs of their existence in the  Risale-i Nur, a Qur’anic commentary which proceeds 
from the Qur’an, leave no need for others. 
As is shown by numerous verses like, 

They  reflect  on  the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  earth,  saying:  “O  our 
Sustainer! Indeed You have not created this in vain; glory be  

                                             

18 Qur’an, 93:8, etc. 

 

252

unto You; and protect us from the torment of the Fire!”19  * O our Sustainer! 
Avert from us the torment of Hell; indeed its torment is a grievous affliction, 
* And evil it is as a resting-place and abode,20  

and indicated by foremost God’s Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon 
him) and all the prophets and people of reality always repeating in their supplications, 
“Preserve us from Hell-fire! Deliver us from Hell-fire! Save us from Hell-fire!”, which 
due  to  their  revelations  and  illuminations  for  them  was  certain,  the  most momentous 
question  facing  mankind  is  to  be  saved  from  Hell.  Hell  is  also  a  vast,  awesome,  and 
supremely  important  truth  of  the  universe  which  some  of  the  people  of  illumination 
and witnessing and those who investigate the realities have observed, and seeing some 
of its distillations and shadows, have cried out in terror: “Preserve us from the Fire!” 

Yes, the confrontation and interpenetration of good and evil in the universe, and 
pain and pleasure, light and darkness, heat and cold, beauty and ugliness, and guidance 
and  misguidance  are  for  a  vast  instance  of  wisdom.  For  if  there  were  no  evil,  good 
would not be known. If there were no pain, pleasure would not be understood. Light 
without darkness would lack all importance. The degrees of heat are realized through 
cold. Through ugliness, a single instance of beauty becomes a thousand in-stances, and 
thousands  of  varying  degrees  of  beauty  come  into  existence.  If  there  were  no  Hell, 
many of  the pleasures of Paradise would remain concealed. By analogy with these, in 
one respect everything may be known through its opposite and a single truth produce 
numerous  shoots  and  become  numerous  truths.  Since  these  intermingled beings pour 
from  this  transitory  realm  into  the  eternal  realm,  surely  just  as  things  like  good, 
pleasure, light, beauty, and belief are poured into Paradise; so harmful matters like evil, 
pain,  darkness,  ugliness,  and  disbelief  flow  into  Hell,  and  the  floods  of  this 
continuously agitated universe are emptied into those two pools. Referring you to the 
‘Allusive  Points’  at  the  end  of  the  wondrous  Twenty-Ninth  Word,  we  curtail  this 
discussion here. 

My  fellow  students  here  in  this  School  of  Joseph!  The  easiest  way  to  be  saved 
from that dreadful, everlasting prison is to profit from our worldly prison, and besides 
being  saved  from  the  many  sins  we  are  bound  to  refrain  from,  by  repenting  for  our 
former sins and performing the obligatory worship, to make every hour of our prison 
life here the equivalent of a day’s worship. This is the best opportunity we may have to 
be saved from that eternal prison and to win luminous Paradise. If we miss  

                                             

19 Qur’an, 3:191. 
20 Qur’an, 25:65-6. 

 

253

this  opportunity,  our  lives  in  the  hereafter  will  weep  the  same  as  our  lives  here  are 
weeping, and we shall receive the slap of the verse, 
He has lost this world and the hereafter.21  

It was the Feast of Sacrifices while this ‘station’ was being written   

One  fifth  of  mankind,  three  hundred  million  people,  together  declaring:  “God  is 
Most  Great!  God  is  Most Great! God is Most Great!”; and in relation to its size the 
globe broadcasting to its fellow planets in the skies the sacred words of God is Most 
Great!;  and  the  more  than  twenty  thousand  pilgrims  performing  the  Hajj,  on  ‘Arafat 
and at the Festival, together declaring: “God is Most Great!” are all a response in the 
form  of  extensive,  universal  worship  to  the  universal  manifestation  of  Divine 
dominicality  through  God’s  sublime  titles  of  Sustainer  of  the  Earth  and  Sustainer  of 
All  The  Worlds,  and  are  a  sort  of  echo  of  the  God  is  Most  Great!  spoken  and 
commanded one thousand three hundred years ago by God’s Noble Messenger (Peace 
and blessings be upon him) and his  Family and Companions. This I imagined and felt 
and was certain about.  

Then  I  wondered  if  the  sacred  phrase  has  any  connection  with  our  matter.  It 
suddenly occurred to me that foremost this phrase and many others of these marks of 
Islam  like  There  is  no  god  but  God,  All  praise  be  to  God!,  and  Glory  be  to  God!, 
which  bear  the  title  of  “enduring  good  works,”  recall  particular  and  universal  points 
about the matter we are discussing, and infer its realization. 

For  example,  one  aspect  of  the  meaning  of  God  is  Most  Great!  is  that  Divine 
power  and knowledge are greater than everything; nothing at all can quit the bounds 
of  God’s  knowledge,  nor  escape  or  be saved from the disposals of His power. He is 
greater than the things we fear most. This means He is greater than bringing about the 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  saving  us  from  non-existence,  and  bestowing  eternal 
happiness.  He is greater than any strange  or unimaginable thing, so that, as explicitly 
stated by the verse, 

Your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul,22 

the resurrection of mankind is as easy for His power as the creation of a single soul. It 
is  in  connection  with  this  meaning  that  when  faced  by  serious  disasters  or  important 
undertakings,  everyone  says:  “God  is  Most  Great!  God is Most Great!”, making it a 
source of consolation, strength, and support for themselves. 

                                             

21 Qur’an, 22:11. 
22 Qur’an, 31:28. 

 

254

As is shown in the Ninth Word, the above phrase and its two fellows, that is, God 
is Most Great!, and Glory be to God!, and All praise be to God!, form the seeds and 
summaries  of  the  ritual  prayers  —the  index  of  all  worship—  and  in  order  to 
corroborate  the  meaning  of  the  prayers,  are  repeated in  the  tesbihat  following  them. 
They  provide  the  powerful  answers  to  the  questions  arising  from  the  wonderment, 
pleasure,  and  awe  man  feels  at  the  strange,  beautiful,  extraordinary  things  he  sees  in 
the  universe,  which  cause  him  to  offer  thanks  and  to  feel  awe  at  their  grandeur. 
Moreover,  at  the  end  of  the  Sixteenth  Word,  it  is  described  how  at  the  festival  a 
private soldier and a field marshal enter the king’s presence together, whereas at other 
times  the  soldier  has  contact  with  the  field  marshal  only  through  his  commanding 
officer. Similarly, somewhat resembling the saints, a person making the Hajj begins to 
know God through His titles of Sustainer of the Earth and Sustainer of All the Worlds. 
With  its  repetition,  it  is  again  God  is  Most  Great  that  answers  all  the  feverish 
bewildered  questions that overwhelm his spirit as the levels of grandeur unfold in his 
heart.  Furthermore, at  the  end  of  the Thirteenth Flash, it is described how it is again 
God is Most Great that replies most effectively to Satan’s cunning wiles, cutting them 
at  the  root,  as  well  as  answering  succinctly  but  powerfully  our  question  about  the 
hereafter.  

The phrase All praise be to God also reminds us of resurrection. It says to us: “I 
would  have  no  meaning  if  there  was  no  hereafter.  For  I  say:  to  God  is  due  all  the 
praise  and  thanks  that  have  been  offered  from  pre-eternity  to  post-eternity,  whoever 
they have been offered by and to whom, for the chief of all bounties and the only thing 
that  makes  bounty  true  bounty  and  saves  all  conscious  creatures  from  the  endless 
calamities of non-existence, is eternal happiness; it is only eternal happiness that can be 
equal to that universal meaning of mine.” 

Yes,  every  day  all  believers  saying  at  least  one  hundred  and  fifty  times  after  the 
obligatory  prayers:  All  praise  be  to  God!  All  praise  be  to  God!,  as  enjoined  by  the 
Shari‘a,  and  its  being  the  expression  of  praise  and  thanks  which  extend  from  pre-
eternity to post-eternity, can only be the advance price and immediate fee for Paradise 
and  eternal  happiness.  They  offer  thanks  since  bounties  are  not  restricted  to  the 
fleeting  bounties  of  this  world,  which  are  tainted  by  the  pains  of  transience,  and  see 
them as the means to eternal bounties. 

As  for  the  sacred  phrase,  Glory  be  to  God!;  with  its  meaning  of  declaring  God 
free  of all partner, fault, defect, tyranny, impotence, unkindness, need, and deception, 
and all faults opposed to His perfection, beauty, and glory, it recalls eternal happiness 
and the realm of the hereafter and Paradise within it, which are the means to His glory 
and beauty and the  

 

255

majesty  and  perfection  of  His  sovereignty;  the  phrase  alludes  to  them  and  indicates 
them.  For, as has been proved previously, if there was no eternal happiness, both His 
sovereignty,  and  His  perfection,  glory,  beauty,  and  mercy  would  be  stained  by  fault 
and defect. 

Like these three sacred phrases, In the Name of God and There is no god but God 
and  other  blessed  phrases  are  all  seeds  to  the  pillars  of  faith.  Like the meat essences 
and sugar concentrates that have been discovered recently, they are summaries of both 
the pillars of belief, and the truths of the Qur’an. The three mentioned above are both 
the seeds of the five daily prayers, and they are the seeds of the Qur’an, sparkling like 
brilliants  at  the  beginning  of  a  number  of  shining  suras.  So  too  are  they  the  true 
sources  and  bases  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  many of whose inspirations first came while I 
was  reciting  the  tesbihat  following  the  prayers;  they  are  the  seeds  of  its  truths.  In 
respect  of  the  sainthood  and  worship  of  Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon 
him),  these  phrases  are  the  invocations  of  the  Muhammadan  (PBUH)  way  which, 
following  each  of  the  five  daily  prayers,  more  than  one  hundred  million  believers 
repeat  together  in  a  vast  circle  of  remembrance.  Their  beads  in  their  hands,  they 
declare  Glory  be  to  God!  thirty-three times, All praise be to God! thirty-three times, 
and God is Most Great! thirty-three times. 

You  have  surely  understood  now  the  great  value  of  reciting  thirty-three  times 
after the five daily prayers, in such a splendid circle for the remembrance of God, each 
of those three blessed phrases, which as explained above, are the summaries and seeds 
of  both  the  Qur’an,  and  belief,  and  the  prayers.  You  have  understood  too  the  great 
reward they yield. 

[The  First  Topic  at  the  beginning  of  this  treatise  forms  an  excellent  lesson 
about  the  obligatory  five daily prayers. Then, although I  did not think of it, 
involuntarily  the  end  here  became  an  important  lesson  about  the  tesbihat 
following the prayers.] 

Praise be to God for His bounties. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.23 

                                             

23 Qur’an, 2:32. 

 

256

The Ninth Topic 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
The Messenger believes in what has been revealed to him from his Sustainer. 
As do the men of faith. Each one [of them] believes in God, His angels, His 
Books, and His Messengers. “We make no distinction [they say] between one 
and another of His Messengers...” [to the end of the verse]24  

An  awesome  question  and  a  state  of  mind  arising  from  the  unfolding  of  a  vast 
Divine  bounty  were  the  causes  of  my explaining a universal, lengthy point about this 
comprehensive,  elevated  and  sublime  verse.  It  was  like  this:  it  occurred to my spirit: 
why does one who denies a part of the truths of belief become a disbeliever, and one 
who does not accept a part of them cannot be a Muslim? Surely belief in God and the 
hereafter dispels the darkness like the sun. Also, why does a person who denies one of 
the  pillars  and  truths  of  belief  become  an  apostate,  falling  into  disbelief,  and  by  not 
accepting it, quit Islam? Whereas if he believes in the other pillars of belief, it should 
save him from absolute disbelief? 

T h e   A n s w e r :  Belief is a single truth, which, composed of its six pillars, 
cannot be divided up. It is a universal that cannot be separated into parts. It is a whole 
that cannot be broken up. For each of the pillars of belief proves the other pillars with 
the  proofs  that  prove  itself. They  are all  extremely powerful  proofs of each other. In 
which  case,  an  invalid  idea  that  cannot  shake  all  the  pillars  together  with  all  their 
proofs, cannot in reality negate any one of the pillars, or even a single of their truths, 
and  cannot deny them. Under the veil of non-acceptance one might only, by shutting 
his  eyes,  commit  ‘obstinate unbelief;’ he  would  by degrees fall into absolute disbelief 
and  lose  his  humanity,  and  go  to  Hell,  both  physically  and  mentally.  In  this  station 
then, with God’s grace, we shall explain this supreme matter in six Points in the form 
of brief summaries, just as in the Fruits Of Belief when proving the resurrection of the 
dead, the other pillars of belief’s proofs of resurrection were propounded in the form 
of brief summaries. 

                                             

24 Qur’an, 2:285. 

 

257

FIRST POINT 

Belief  in  God  proves  with  its  own  proofs  both  the  other  pillars  and  belief  in the 
hereafter, as is shown clearly in the Seventh Topic of the Fruits Of Belief. Yes, is it at 
all  possible  and  can  reason  accept  that  a  pre-eternal  everlasting  sovereignty  of 
dominicality,  a  post-eternal  Divine  rule,  which  administers  the  boundless  universe  as 
though  it  were  a  palace,  a  city,  or  a  country;  and  makes  it  revolve  in  balanced  and 
ordered  fashion;  and  changes  it  with  wisdom;  and  equips  and  directs  all  together 
particles, planets, flies, and stars as though each were a regular army, and continuously 
drills  them  within  the  spheres  of  command  and  will  in  a  lofty  manoeuvre;  and 
employing them in duties makes them act, and causes them to roam and travel, and to 
parade  worshipfully;  —is  it at all possible that that eternal, everlasting, enduring rule 
would  not  have  an  eternal  seat,  a  permanent  and  everlasting  place  of  manifestation; 
that  is,  the  hereafter?  God  forbid!  That  means  the  sovereignty  of  Almighty  God’s 
dominicality and —as is described in the Seventh Topic— most of His Names and the 
proofs  of  His  necessary  existence,  require  the  hereafter  and  testify  to  it.  So  see  and 
understand  what  powerful  support  this  pole  of  belief  has,  and believe in it as though 
seeing it! 

Also,  just  as  there  could  be  no  belief  in  God  without  the  hereafter;  so  —as  is 
explained  with  brief  indications  in  the  Tenth  Word—  is  it  at  all  possible  and  could 
reason  accept  that  God,  the  True  Object  of  Worship,  should  create  the  universe,  in 
order  to  manifest  His  Godhead  and  fitness  to  be  worshipped,  as  an  embodied  book 
every  page  of  which  expresses  a  book  of  meanings  and  every  line  of  which  states  a 
page of meanings, and as an embodied Qur’an all the creational signs and words, and 
even  points  and  letters  of  which  are  miracles,  and  as  a  magnificent  mosque  of  His 
mercy  the  inside  of  which  is  decorated with numberless inscriptions and adornments, 
and in every corner of which are species of beings each preoccupied with the worship 
dictated by its nature —is it at all possible He should create it in this way and not send 
masters  to  teach  the  meanings  of  that  vast  book,  and  commentators  to  expound the 
verses of that Qur’an, and not appoint prayer-leaders to that huge mosque to lead all 
those worshipping in their myriad ways, and that He should not give decrees to those 
masters,  commentators,  and  leaders  of  worship?  God  forbid,  a  hundred  thousand 
times! 

Also,  is  it  at  all  possible  and  could  reason  accept  that  the  Most  Compassionate 
and Munificent Maker, Who in order to display to conscious beings the beauty of His 
mercy and the goodness of His compassion and the perfection of His dominicality, and 
in order to encourage them to  

 

258

praise and thank Him, creates the universe as a banqueting hall, exhibition, and place 
of  excursion  in  which  are  displayed  infinite  varieties  of  delicious  bounties  and 
priceless,  wondrous  arts,  is  it  at  all  possible  that  He  should  not  speak  with  those 
conscious  beings  at  the  banquet  and  not  inform  them  by  means  of  envoys  of  their 
duties  of  thanks  for  the  bounties,  and  their  duties  of  worship  in  the  face  of  the 
manifestations  of  His  mercy  and  His  making  Himself  loved?  God  forbid,  a  hundred 
thousand times! 

Also, is it at all possible that although the Maker loves His art and wants others to 
love it, and as is shown by His having taken into account the thousand pleasures of the 
mouth,  wants  it  to  be  met  with  appreciation  and  approval,  and  has  adorned  the 
universe with priceless arts in a way that shows He wants through all His arts both to 
make Himself known, and loved, and to display a sort of His transcendent beauty, is it 
at all possible that He should not speak to men, the commanders of living beings in the 
universe,  through  some  of  the  most  eminent  of  them,  and  send  them  as  envoys,  and 
that His fine arts should not be appreciated and the exquisite beauty of His Names not 
be valued, and His making Himself known and loved be unreciprocated? God forbid, a 
hundred thousand times! 

Also,  is  it  at  all  possible  or  reasonable  that  the  All-Knowing  Speaker  Who 
answers clearly by act and deed through His infinite bounties and gifts, which indicate 
intention,  choice,  and  will,  at  exactly  the  right  time,  all  the  supplications  of  living 
beings  for  their  natural  needs,  and  their  desires  and  recourse  through  the  tongue  of 
disposition,  that  He  should  speak  by  deed  and  by  state  with  the  most  insignificant 
living creature and remedy its woes and heed its troubles with His bounties, and know 
its needs and meet them, then not meet with the spiritual leaders of men, who are the 
choicest result of the universe, vicegerents of the earth, and the commanders of most 
of the creatures on the earth? Although He speaks with them and with all living beings, 
should He not speak with men verbally and send them scriptures, books, and decrees? 
God forbid, innumerable times! 

That  is  to  say,  with  its  certainty  and  innumerable  proofs,  belief  in  God  proves 

belief in the prophets and sacred scriptures. 

Also,  is  it  at  all  possible  or  reasonable  that  in  response  to  the  One  Who  makes 
Himself known and loved through all His creatures and seeks thanks by deed and state, 
Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) should have known and made known, 
loved and made loved that Glorious  Artist through  the Qur’anic reality, which brings 
the the universe to tumult, and with his declarations of “Glory be to God!” “All praise 
be to  

 

259

God!”  and  “God is Most Great!” should have caused the globe to ring out so that it 
could be heard by the heavens, and have brought the land and seas to ecstasy; and that 
in  one  thousand  three  hundred  years  he  should  have  taken  behind  him  numerically  a 
fifth of mankind and qualitatively a half of it, and responded with extensive, universal 
worship  to  all  the  manifestations  of  the  Creator’s  dominicality;  that  in  the face of all 
the Divine purposes he should have called out with the Qur’an’s suras to the universe 
and  the  centuries,  and  taught  them  and  proclaimed  them;  that  he  should  have 
demonstrated  the  honour,  value,  and  duties  of  man;  and  that  he  should  have  been 
confirmed through his thousand miracles — and that he should not have been the most 
choice  creature,  the  most  excellent  of  envoys, and the greatest  prophet? Is this at all 
possible? God forbid! A hundred thousand times, God forbid! 

That is  to  say,  with  all  its  proofs,  the  truth  of “I  testify  that  there  is no god but 

God” proves the truth of “I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of God.” 

Also, is it at all possible that the universe’s Maker should cause creatures to speak 
with  one  another  in  myriad  tongues,  and  that  He  should  listen  to  their  speech,  and 
know it, and Himself not speak? God forbid! 

Also,  is  it  at  all  reasonable  that  He  should  not  proclaim  through  a  decree  the 
Divine  purposes  in  the  universe?  That  He  should  not  send  a  book  like  the  Qur’an 
which  will  solve  its  riddles  and  provide  the  true  answers  to  the  three  awesome 
universally-asked  questions:  “Where do  they come from?”, “Where are they  going?”, 
and “Why do they follow on caravan after caravan, stop by for a while, then pass on?” 
God forbid! 

Also,  is  it  at  all  possible  that  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition,  which  has 
illuminated  thirteen  centuries;  every  hour  is  uttered  with  complete  veneration  by  a 
hundred million tongues; is inscribed through its sacredness in the hearts of millions of 
hafizes;  in  effect  governs  through  its  laws  the  greater  part  of  mankind  and  trains, 
purifies, and instructs their souls, spirits, hearts, and minds; and forty aspects of whose 
miraculousness  is  proved  in  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  explained  in  the  wondrous 
Nineteenth Letter, which demonstrates an aspect of its miraculousness towards each of 
forty  classes  of  men,  and  as  one  of  the  thousand miracles of Muhammad (Peace and 
blessings be upon him) is proved decisively to be the true Word of God; —is it at all 
possible  that  it  should  not  be  the  word  and  decree  of  the  Pre-Eternal  Speaker  and 
Eternal Maker? God forbid! A hundred thousand times, God forbid! 

That is to say, with all its proofs, belief in God proves that the Qur’an is the Word 

of God. 

 

260

Also,  is  it  all  possible  that  the  Glorious  Monarch  Who  continuously  fills  and 
empties  the  earth  with  living  beings  and  inhabits  this  world  of  ours  with  conscious 
creatures in order to make Himself known and worshipped and glorified, should leave 
the  heavens  and  earth  empty  and  vacant,  and  not  create  inhabitants  suitable  to  them 
and settle them in those lofty palaces, that in His most extensive lands he should leave 
the  sovereignty  of  His  dominicality  without  servants,  functionaries,  envoys,  and 
majesty;  without  lieutenants,  supervisors, spectators, worshippers, and subjects? God 
forbid! To the numbers of the angels, God forbid! 

Also,  is  it  at  all  possible  that  the  All-Wise  Ruler,  the  All-Knowing  and 
Compassionate  One,  should  write  the  universe  in  the  form  of  a  book;  inscribe  the 
entire life-stories of trees in all their seeds, and write in the seeds of grasses and plants 
all  their  vital  duties,  and  record  precisely  the  lives  of  conscious  beings  in  their 
memories, as tiny as mustard seeds, and preserve with innumerable photographs all the 
actions and events in all His dominions and all the eras of His sovereignty, and create 
mighty  Heaven  and  Hell  and  the  supreme  scales  of  justice  for  the  manifestation  and 
realization of justice, wisdom and mercy, the basis of His dominicality, then not have 
written  down  the  acts  of  men  connected  with  the  universe,  nor  have  their  deeds 
recorded so they may meet with reward or punishment, nor write their good and bad 
deeds  on  the  tablets  of  Divine  Determining?  God  forbid!  To  the  number  of  letters 
inscribed on them.  

That is to say, with its proofs, the truth of belief in God proves the truth of both 
belief in the angels, and belief in Divine Determining. The pillars of belief prove each 
other as clearly as the sun shows the daylight, and daylight shows the sun. 

SECOND POINT 

All  the  teachings  and  claims  of  foremost  the  Qur’an,  and  all  the  revealed  books 
and  scriptures,  and  foremost  Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him),  and  all 
the  prophets,  are  based  on  five  or  six  points.  They  have  continually  striven  to  teach 
and  prove  those  basic  teachings.  All  the  proofs  and  evidences  which  testify  to  their 
messengership and truthfulness look to those bases, corroborating their veracity. And 
those fundamentals are belief in God and belief in the hereafter and in the other pillars 
of  belief.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  not  possible  to  separate  the  six  pillars  of  belief.  Each 
proves  all  of  them,  and  requires  them,  and  necessitates  them.  The  six  are  a whole, a 
universal, which cannot be broken in parts and whose division is outside the bounds of 
possibility. Like the Tuba-tree whose roots are in the heavens, each branch, fruit and 
leaf of that mighty tree relies on its universal, inexhaustible life. A person  

 

261

unable to deny that powerful life which is as clear as the sun, cannot deny the life of a 
single  of  its  leaves,  attached  to  it.  If  he  does  deny  it,  the  tree  will  refute  him  to the 
number of its branches, fruits, and leaves, and silence him. Belief, with its six pillars, is 
similar to this. 

At the beginning of this ‘Station,’ I intended to expound the six pillars of belief in 
thirty-six points, as six ‘Points,’ each with five sub-sections. I also intended to reply to 
and  explain  the  awesome  question  at  the  beginning.  But  certain  unforeseen 
circumstances  did  not  permit  this.  I  reckon,  the  first  Point  being  sufficient,  for  the 
intelligent no need remained for further explanation. It was understood perfectly that if 
a Muslim denies one of the pillars of belief, he falls into absolute disbelief. For in the 
face  of  the  summary  explanations  of  other  religions,  Islam  expounds  and  elucidates 
them completely, and the pillars of belief are bound together. A Muslim who does not 
recognize Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) and does not assent to him, 
will  also  not  recognize  God,  or  His  attributes,  and  will  not  know  the  hereafter.  A 
Muslim’s  belief  is  based  on  such  powerful,  unshakeable  and  innumerable  proofs  that 
there is no excuse for denial; they quite simply compel the reason to accept them. 

THIRD POINT 

One time, I said “All praise be to God!,” and searched for a bounty that would be 
equal to its infinitely broad meaning. Suddenly, the following sentence occurred to me:  
“All praise be to God for belief in God, and for His unity, and necessary existence, 
and  attributes,  and  Names,  to  the  number  of  the  manifestations  of  His  Names  from 
pre-eternity to post-eternity.” 

I looked and saw it was completely appropriate. As follows.... 

 

262

The Tenth Topic 
A Flower of Emirdag 

 [An  extremely  powerful  reply  to  objections  raised  against  repetition  in  the 
Qur’an.] 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Due  to  my  wretched  situation,  this  Topic  is  confused  and  graceless.  But  I 
knew definitely that beneath the confused wording was a most valuable sort 
of miraculousness, though unfortunately I was incapable of expressing it. But 
however dull the wording, since it concerns the Qur’an, it is both worship in 
the form of reflection, and the shell of a sacred, elevated, shining jewel. The 
diamond in the hand should be looked at, not its torn clothes. Also, I wrote it 
in  one  or  two  days  during  Ramadan  while  extremely  ill,  wretched,  and 
without  food,  of  necessity  very  concisely  and  briefly,  and  including  many 
truths and numerous proofs in a single sentence. Its deficiencies, then, should 
be overlooked!25 

My True, Loyal  Brothers! While reading the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition in 
Ramadan, whichever of the thirty-three verses I came to that in the First Ray describe 
the allusions to the Risale-i Nur, I saw that the page and story of the verse also look to 
the Risale-i Nur and its students to some extent — in so far as they have a share in the 
story.  Particularly  the  Light  Verses  in  Sura  al-Nur,  just  as  they  point  to  the  Risale-i 
Nur  with  ten  fingers,  so  the  Darkness  Verses  following  it  point  directly  at  those 
opposing it; these afford a further share. Quite simply, I understood that this ‘station’ 
rises  from  particularity  to  universality  and  that  one  part  of  that  universality  is  the 
Risale-i Nur and its students.  

Indeed,  in  regard  to  the  breadth,  exaltedness,  and  comprehensiveness  that  the 
Qur’an’s  address  receives  from  firstly  the  extensive  station  of  the  universal 
dominicality  of  the  Pre-Eternal  Speaker,  and  from  the  extensive  station  of  the  one 
addressed in the name of mankind, indeed of all beings,  

                                             

25 As the Tenth Topic of the Fruits of Denizli Prison, it is a small, shining flower of Emirdag and 

of this month of Ramadan. By explaining one instance of wisdom in the repetitions in the Qur’an, it 
dispels the poisonous, putrid illusions of the people of misguidance. 

 

263

and the most extensive station of all mankind’s guidance in all the centuries, and from 
the  station  of  the  most  elevated  comprehensive  expositions  of  the  Divine  laws 
concerning  the  regulation  of  this  world  and  the  hereafter,  and  the  heavens  and  the 
earth,  and  pre-eternity  and  post-eternity,  and  the  dominicality  of  the  Creator  of  the 
universe, and of all beings, this Address displays such an elevated miraculousness and 
comprehensiveness  that  both  its  apparent  and  simple  level,  which  flatters  the  simple 
minds  of  ordinary  people,  the  most  numerous  group  the  Qur’an  addresses,  and  its 
highest level, partakes of it.  

Addressing  every  age  and  every  class  of  people,  in  its  stories  and  historical 
narratives,  it  does  not  recount  one  part  or  one  lesson  from  them,  but  points  out 
elements of a universal principle, as though it was newly revealed. Particularly its often 
repeated  threats  of  the  wrongdoers,  the  wrongdoers,  and  its  severe  expositions  of 
calamities  visited  on  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  the punishment for their wrongdoing 
—through  these  and  the  retribution  visited  on  the  ‘Ad  and  Thamud  peoples  and  on 
Pharaoh—  it  draws  attention  to  the  unequalled  wrongs  of  this  century,  and  through 
the salvation of prophets like Abraham (PUH) and Moses (PUH) gives consolation to 
the oppressed believers. 

Indeed,  all  past  time  and  the  departed  ages  and  centuries,  which  in  the  view  of 
heedlessness and misguidance form a fearsome place of non-existence and a grievous, 
ruined  graveyard,  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  shows  to  every  century  and 
class  of  people  in  the  form  of  living  instructive  pages,  strange  worlds,  living  and 
endowed  with  spirits,  and  existent  realms  of  the  Sustainer  which  are  connected  with 
us.  With  an  elevated  miraculousness,  it  sometimes  conveys  us  to  those  times,  and 
sometimes brings those times to us. Infusing with life the universe, which in the view 
of  misguidance  is  lifeless,  wretched,  dead,  and  a  limitless  wasteland  revolving  amid 
separation  and  decease,  with  the  same  miraculousness  this  same  Qur’an  of  Mighty 
Stature  raises  to  life  those  dead  beings,  makes  them  converse  with  one  another  as 
officials  charged  with  duties  and  hasten  to  the  assistance  of  one  another;  it  instructs 
mankind, the jinn, and the angels in true, luminous, and pleasurable wisdom.  

For sure, then, it acquires sacred distinctions, like there being ten merits in each of 
its letters, and sometimes a hundred, a thousand, or thousands of merits; and if all men 
and  jinn  were  to  gather  together,  their  being  unable  to produce the like of it; and its 
speaking completely appropriately with all mankind and all beings; and its all the time 
being inscribed with eagerness in the hearts of millions of hafizes; and its not causing 
weariness through its frequent and numerous repetitions; and despite its many obscure 
passages and sentences, its being settled perfectly in the delicate  

 

264

and simple heads of children; and its being agreeable like Zamzam water in the ears of 
the sick, the dying, and those distressed by a few words; and its gaining for its students 
happiness in this world and the next. 

Its smoothness of style, which, observing exactly its interpreter’s being unlettered, 
allows  for  no  bombast,  artificiality,  or  affectedness,  and  its  descending  directly  from 
the heavens, demonstrate a fine miraculousness. So too it shows a fine miraculousness 
in the grace and guidance of flattering the simple minds of ordinary people, the most 
numerous  of  the  classes  of  men,  through  the  condescension  in  its  expression,  and 
mostly  opening  the  clearest  and  most  evident  pages  like  the  heavens  and  earth,  and 
teaching  the  wondrous  miracles  of  power  and  meaningful  lines  of  wisdom  beneath 
those commonplace things.  

By making known that it is also a book of prayer and summons, of invocation and 
Divine  unity,  which  require  repetition,  it  demonstrates  a  sort  of  miraculousness 
through  making  understood  in  a  single  sentence  and  a  single  story  through  its 
agreeable  repetitions  numerous  different  meanings  to  numerous  different  classes  of 
people.  Similarly,  by  making  known  that  the  most  minor  and  unimportant  things  in 
ordinary, commonplace events are within its compassionate view and the sphere of its 
will and regulation, it demonstrates a sort of miraculousness in attaching importance to 
even the minor events involving the Companions of the Prophet in the establishment of 
Islam  and  codification  of  the  Shari‘a,  and  both  in  those  events  being  universal 
principles, and, in the establishment of Islam and the Shari‘a, which are general, their 
producing most important fruits, as though they had been seeds. 

With  regard  to  repetition  being  necessary  due  to  the  repetition  of  need,  the 
repetition of certain verses which, as answers to numerous questions repeated over a 
period  of  twenty  years,  instructs  numerous  different  levels  of  people  is  not  a  fault, 
indeed, to repeat certain sentences so powerful they produce thousands of results and 
a  number  of  verses  resulting  from  countless  evidences,  which  describe  an  infinite, 
awesome,  all-embracing  revolution  that,  by  destroying  utterly  the  vast  universe  and 
changing its shape at Doomsday, will remove the world and found the mighty hereafter 
in  its  place,  and  will  prove  that  all  particulars  and  universals from atoms to the stars 
are  in  the  hand  and  under  the  disposal  of  a  single  Being,  and  will  show  the  Divine 
wrath and dominical  anger —on account of the result of the universe’s creation— at 
mankind’s  wrongdoing,  which  brings  to  anger  the  earth  and  the  heavens  and  the 
elements, to repeat such verses is not a fault, but most powerful miraculousness, and 
most  elevated  eloquence;  an  eloquence  and  lucid  style  corresponding  exactly  to  the 
requirements of the subject. 

 

sentence, 

265

For  example,  as  is  explained  in  the  Fourteenth  Flash  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  the 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate, 

which constitutes a single verse and is repeated one hundred and fourteen times in the 
Qur’an,  is  a  truth  which  binds  the  Divine  Throne  and  the  earth,  and  illuminates  the 
cosmos,  and  for which everyone is in need  all the  time; if it was repeated millions of 
times, there would still be need for it. There is need and longing for it, not only every 
day like bread, but every moment like air and light. 

And, for example, the verse, 

And verily your Sustainer is Exalted in Might, Most Compassionate,26 

which is repeated eight times in Sura Ta. Sin. Mim. Repeating on account of the result 
of  the  universe’s  creation  and  in  the  name  of  universal  dominicality,  the  salvation  of 
the prophets whose stories are told in the sura, and the punishments of their peoples, 
in order to teach that that dominical dignity requires the torments of those wrongdoing 
peoples  while  Divine  compassion  requires  the  prophets’  salvation,  is  a  concise, 
miraculous,  and  elevated  miraculousness,  for  which,  if  repeated  thousands  of  times, 
there would still be need and longing. 
And, for example, the verse, 

Then which of the favours of your Sustainer will you deny?,27 

which is repeated in Sura al-Rahman, and the verse, 

Woe that Day to the rejecters of truth!,28 

in  Sura  al-Mursalat  shout  out  threateningly  to  mankind  and  the  jinn  across  the 
centuries and the heavens and the earth, the unbelief, ingratitude, and wrongdoing of 
those  who bring the universe and the heavens and earth to anger, spoil the results of 
the  world’s  creation,  and  deny  and  respond slightingly  to  the  majesty of Divine rule, 
and  violate  the  rights  of  all  creatures.  If  a  general  lesson  thus  concerned  with 
thousands of truths and of the strength of thousands of matters is repeated thousands 
of  times,  there  would  still  be  need  for  it  and  its  awe-inspiring  conciseness  and 
beautiful, miraculous eloquence. 

And, for example, the repetition of the phrase,  

Glory be unto You! There is no god but You: Mercy! Mercy! Save us, deliver 
us, preserve us, from Hell-fire! 

                                             

26 Qur’an, 26:9, etc. 
27 Qur’an, 55:13, etc. 
28 Qur’an, 77:15, etc. 

 

266

in  the  supplication  of  the  Prophet  (PBUH)  called  Jawshan  al-Kabir,  which  is  a  true 
and authentic supplication of the Qur’an and a sort of summary proceeding from it. It 
contains  the  greatest  truth  and  the  most  important  of  the  three  supreme  duties  of 
creatures in the face of dominicality, the glorification and praise of God and declaring 
Him to be All-Holy, and the most awesome question facing man, his being saved from 
eternal misery, and worship, the most necessary result of human impotence. So if it is 
repeated thousands of times, it is still few. 

Thus,  repetition  in  the  Qur’an  looks  to  principles  like  these.  Sometimes  on  one 
page,  even,  with  regard  to  the  requirements  of  the  position  and  the  need  for 
explanation  and  the  demands  of  eloquence,  it  expresses  the  truth  of  Divine  unity 
perhaps  twenty  times,  explicitly  and  by  implication.  It  does  not  cause  boredom,  but 
affords it a power, and eagerness. It has been explained in the Risale-i Nur with proofs 
how  appropriate,  fitting,  and  acceptable  in  the  eyes  of  rhetoric  are  the  repetitions  in 
the Qur’an. The wisdom and meaning of the Meccan and Medinan Suras in the Qur’an 
of Miraculous Exposition being different in regard to eloquence, miraculousness, and 
detail and brevity is as follows: 

In Mecca, the first line of those it was addressing and those opposed to it were the 
idolators of the Quraysh and untaught tribesmen, so a powerful and elevated rhetorical 
style  was  necessary,  and  a  miraculous,  convincing,  persuasive  conciseness.  And  in 
order  to  establish  it,  repetition  was  required.  Thus,  in  most  of  the  Meccan  suras, 
repeating  and  expressing  the  pillars of belief and degrees in the affirmation of Divine 
unity  with  a  most  powerful,  elevated,  and  miraculous  conciseness,  it  proved  so 
powerfully the first creation and the Resurrection, God and the hereafter, not only in a 
single  page,  verse,  sentence  or  word,  but  sometimes in a letter, through grammatical 
devices like altering the positions of the words or sentences, making a word indefinite, 
and  omissions  and  inclusions,  that the geniuses and leaders of the science of rhetoric 
met it with wonder. The Risale-i Nur, and the Twenty-Fifth Word and its Addenda in 
particular, which prove in summary forty aspects of the Qur’an’s miraculousness, and 
the  Qur’anic  commentary,  Isharat  al-I’jaz,  from  the  Arabic  Risale-i  Nur,  which  in 
wondrous fashion proves the aspect of the Qur’an’s miraculousness in its word-order, 
have demonstrated in fact that in the Meccan suras and verses are the highest styles of 
eloquence and the most elevated, concise miraculousness. 

As  for  the  Medinan  suras  and  verses,  since  the  first  line  of  those  they  were 
addressing  and  who  opposed  them  were  the  People  of  the  Book,  the  Jews  and 
Christians  who  affirmed  God’s  existence,  what  was  required  by  eloquence  and 
guidance and for the discussion to correspond to the  

 

267

situation, was not explanation of the high principles of religion and pillars of belief in a 
simple, clear, and detailed style, but the explanation of particular matters in the Shari‘a 
and  its  injunctions,  which  were  the  cause  of  dispute,  and  the  origins  and  causes  of 
secondary  matters  and  general  laws.  Thus,  in  the  Medinan  suras  and verses, through 
explanations  in  a  detailed,  clear,  simple  style,  in  the  matchless  manner  of  exposition 
peculiar to the Qur’an, it mostly mentions within those particular secondary matters, a 
powerful  and  elevated  summary  —  a  conclusion  and  proof,  a  sentence  related  to 
Divine unity, belief, or the hereafter which makes the  particular matter of the Shari‘a 
universal and ensures that it conforms to belief in God. It illuminates the passage, and 
elevates  it.  The  Risale-i  Nur  has  proved  the  qualities  and  fine  points  and  elevated 
eloquence  in  the  summaries  and  conclusions,  which  express  Divine  unity  and  the 
hereafter, and come mostly at the end of verses, like: 

Indeed, God is powerful over all things.29 * Verily God has knowledge of all 
things.30 * And He is the Mighty, the Wise.31 * And He is Exalted in Might, 
Most Compassionate.32 

Explaining in the Second Beam of the Second Light of the Twenty-Fifth Word, ten out 
of  the  many  fine  points  of  those  summaries  and  conclusions,  it  has  proved  to  the 
obstinate that they contain a supreme miracle. 

Yes, in expounding those secondary matters of the Shari‘a and laws of social life, 
the Qur’an at once raises the views of those it addresses to elevated, universal points, 
and  transforming  a  simple style into  an elevated one and instruction in the Shari‘a to 
instruction  in  Divine  unity,  it  shows  it  is  both  a  book  of  law  and  commands  and 
wisdom, and a book of the tenets of faith and belief, and of invocation and reflection 
and summons. And through teaching many of the aims of Qur’anic guidance in every 
passage, it displays a brilliant and miraculous eloquence different to that of the Meccan 
suras. 

Sometimes  in  two  words,  for  example,  in  Sustainer  of  All  the  Worlds  and Your 
Sustainer,  through  the  phrase,  Your  Sustainer,  it  expresses  Divine  oneness,  and 
through,  Sustainer  of  All  the  Worlds,  Divine  unity.  It  expresses  the  Divine  oneness 
within Divine unity. In a single sentence even it sees and situates a particle in the pupil 
of  an  eye,  and  with  the  same  verse,  the  same  hammer,  it  situates  the  sun  in  the  sky, 
making it an eye to the sky. For example, after the verse, 

                                             

29 Qur’an, 2:20. 
30 Qur’an, 29:62. 
31 Qur’an, 30:27. 
32 Qur’an, 30:5. 

 

268

Who created the heavens and the earth, 

following the verse, 

it says:  

He merges the night into the day, and He merges the day into the night, 

And He has full knowledge of all that is in [men’s] hearts.33  

It says: “Within the vast majesty of the creation of the earth and the skies, He knows 
and  regulates  the  thoughts  of  the  heart.”  Through  an  exposition  of  this  sort,  it 
transforms  that  simple,  unlettered  level  and  particular  discussion  which  takes  into 
account  the  minds  of  ordinary  people,  into  an  elevated,  attractive,  and  general 
conversation for the purpose of guidance. 

A Question: “Sometimes an important truth is not apparent to a superficial view, 
and in some positions the connection is not known when a concise phrase expounding 
Divine unity or a universal principle is drawn out from a minor, ordinary matter, and it 
is imagined to be a fault. For example, to mention the extremely elevated principle:  

And over all endued with knowledge, One Knowing34  

when  Joseph  (Peace  be  upon  him)  seized  his  brother  through  subterfuge,  does  not 
appear to be in keeping with eloquence. What is its meaning and purpose?” 

The Answer:   In most of the long and middle-length suras, which are each small 
Qur’ans, and in many pages and passages, not only two or three aims are followed, for 
by its nature the Qur’an comprises many books and teachings, such as being a book of 
invocation,  belief,  and  reflection,  and  a  book  of  law,  wisdom,  and  guidance.  Thus, 
since  it  describes  the  majestic  manifestations  of  Divine  dominicality  and  its 
encompassing  all things, as a sort of recitation of the mighty book of the universe, it 
follows  many  aims  in  every  discussion  and  sometimes  on  a  single  page.  While 
instructing in knowledge of God, the degrees in Divine unity, and the truths of belief, 
with  an  apparently  weak  connection  it  opens  another  subject  of  instruction  in  the 
following  passage,  joining  powerful  connections  to  the  weak  one.  It  corresponds 
perfectly to the discussion and raises the level of eloquence. 

A Second Question:  “What is the wisdom in and purpose of *the Qur’an proving 

and drawing attention to the hereafter, Divine unity, and  

                                             

33 Qur’an, 57:4-6. 
34 Qur’an, 12:76. 

 

269

man’s reward and punishment thousands of times, explicitly, implicitly, and allusively, 
and teaching them in every sura, on every page, and in every discussion?” 

The  Answer:  In  order  to  teach  concerning  the  most  momentous  matters  in  the 
sphere  of  contingency,  and  the  revolutions  in  the  universe’s  history,  and  the  most 
important, most significant, most awesome matters related to man’s duties, which —
since he has undertaken the supreme trust and vicegerency of the earth— will lead to 
either  his  perdition  or  everlasting  happiness,  and  in  order  to  remove  his  countless 
doubts  and  to  smash  his  violent  denials  and  obduracy,  indeed,  to  make  man  confirm 
those awesome revolutions and submit to those most necessary essential matters which 
are as great as the revolutions, if the Qur’an draws his attention to them thousands, or 
even millions of times, it is not excessive, for those discussions in the Qur’an are read 
millions of times, and they do not cause boredom, nor does the need cease. 

For example, since the verse, 

For  those  who  believe  and  do  righteous  deeds  are  gardens  beneath  which 
rivers flow; they will dwell there forever,35 

announces the good news of eternal happiness, and “saves from the eternal extinction 
of  death,  which  every  moment  shows  itself  to  wretched  man,  both  himself,  and  his 
world,  and  all  those  he  loves,  and  gains  for  them  an  everlasting  sovereignty,”  if  it  is 
repeated  thousands  of  millions  of  times  and  given  the  importance  of  the  universe,  it 
still  is  not  excessive  and  does  not  lose  its  value.  Thus,  in  teaching  innumerable, 
invaluable matters of this sort, and endeavouring to persuade, convince, and prove the 
occurrence  of  the  awesome  revolutions  which  will  destroy  the  present  form  of  the 
universe  and  transform  it  as  though  it  was  a  house,  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous 
Exposition  certainly  draws  attention  to  these  matters  thousands  of  times  explicitly, 
implicitly, and allusively, and this is not excessive, but renews the bounty which is like 
an essential need, the same as the essential needs of bread, medicine, air, and light are 
renewed. 

And,  for  example,  as  is  proved  decisively in the  Risale-i Nur, the wisdom in the 

Qur’an repeating severely, angrily, and forcefully, threatening verses like, 

For  wrongdoers  there  is  a  grievous  penalty.36  *  But  for  those  who  reject 
[God] — for them will be the Fire of Hell.37 

                                             

35 Qur’an, 5:85, etc. 
36 Qur’an, 14:22. 
37 Qur’an, 35:36. 

 

270

is  that  man’s  unbelief  is  such  a  transgression  against  the  rights  of  the  universe  and 
most  creatures  that  it  makes  the  heavens  and  earth  angry  and  brings  the  elements  to 
anger so that they deal blows on those wrongdoers with tempest and storm. According 
to the clear statement of the verses, 

And when they are cast therein, they will hear the [terrible] drawing-in of its 
breath as it blazes forth * Almost bursting with fury,38 

Hell  so  rages  at  those  iniquitous  deniers  that  it  almost  disintegrates  with  fury.  Thus, 
through  the  wisdom  of  showing,  not  from  the  point  of  view  of  man’s  smallness  and 
insignificance  before  such  a  general  crime  and  boundless  aggression,  but  the 
importance of the rights of the Monarch of Universe’s subjects before the greatness of 
the wrongful crime and the awesomeness of the unjust aggression, and the boundless 
ugliness in the unbelief and iniquity of those deniers —in accordance with the wisdom 
of showing this, if repeating in His decree most wrathfully and severely the crime and 
its  punishment,  thousands,  millions,  or  even  thousands  of  millions  of  times,  it  still 
would not be excessive and a fault, because for a thousand years thousands of millions 
of people have read such verses every day, not with boredom, but with total eagerness 
and need. 

Indeed, every day, all the time, for everyone, one world disappears and the door 
of  a  new  world  is  opened  to  them.  Through  repeating  There  is  no  god  but  God  a 
thousand  times  out  of  need  and  with  longing  in  order  to  illuminate  each  of  those 
transitory worlds, it makes There is no god but God a lamp for each of those changing 
veils. In the same way, in accordance with the wisdom of appreciating through reading 
the  Qur’an  the  penalties  of  those  crimes  and  the  severe  threats  of  the  Pre-Eternal 
Monarch, which smash their obduracy, and of working to be saved from the rebellion 
of the soul, so as not to obscure in darkness those multiple, fleeting veils and renewed 
travelling  universes,  and  not  to  make  ugly  their  images  which  are  reflected  in  the 
mirrors of their lives, and not to turn against them those guest views which may testify 
in  favour  of  them,  the  Qur’an  repeats  them  in  truly  meaningful  fashion.  Even  Satan 
would shudder at imagining to be out of place these so powerful, severe, and repeated 
threats of the Qur’an. It shows that the torments of Hell are pure justice for the deniers 
who do not heed them.  

And,  for  example,  in  repeating  many  times  the  stories  of  Moses  (Peace be upon 
him), which contain many instances of wisdom and benefits, like the story of his Staff, 
and  of  the  other  prophets  (Peace  be  upon  them),  it  demonstrates  that  the 
prophethoods of all the other prophets are a proof  

                                             

38 Qur’an, 67:7-8. 

 

271

of  the  veracity of the messengership of Muhammad (PBUH), and that one who does 
not  deny  all  of  them  cannot  in  truth  deny  his  messengership.  For  this  purpose,  and 
since everyone does not always have the time or capability to read the whole Qur’an, it 
repeats  those  stories  in  the  same  way  as  the  important  pillars  of  belief,  in  order  to 
make  all  the  long  and  middle-length  suras  each  like  a  small  Qur’an.  To  repeat  them 
then  is  not  excessive,  it  is  required  by  eloquence,  and  teaches  that  the  question  of 
Muhammad  (PBUH)  is  the  greatest  question  of  mankind  and  the  most  important 
matter of the universe. 

It  has  been  demonstrated  decisively  in  the  Risale-i  Nur  with  many  proofs  and 
indications that through giving the highest position to the person of Muhammad in the 
Qur’an  and  including  him  in  four  pillars  of  belief  and  holding  Muhammad  is  the 
Messenger  of  God  equal  to  the  pillar  of  There  is  no  god  but  God,  that  the 
messengership  of  Muhammad  (PBUH)  is  the  greatest  truth  in  the  universe,  and  that 
the  person  of  Muhammad  is  the  most  noble  of  creatures, and his universal collective 
personality  and  sacred  rank,  known  as  the  Muhammadan  Reality, is the most radiant 
Sun  of  the  two  worlds.  His  worthiness  for  this  extraordinary  position  has  also  been 
proved. One of these proofs is this: 

According to the principle of ‘the cause is like the doer,’ with the equivalent of all 
the good works performed by all his community at all times entering his book of good 
works; and the light which he brought illuminating all the truths of the cosmos; and his 
making grateful not only the jinn, mankind, and animate beings, but also the universe 
and the heavens and earth; and the supplications of plants, offered through the tongue 
of  disposition,  and  the  supplications  of  animals  offered  through  the  tongue  of  their 
innate  need,  and  the  righteous  of  his  (PBUH)  community  every  day  bequeathing  to 
him their benedictions and supplications for mercy and spiritual gains, whose millions 
—and  together  with  spirit  beings,  even,  millions  of  millions—  of  unrejectable 
supplications are accepted, as we actually witness with our eyes; and since each of the 
three  hundred  thousand  letters  of  the  Qur’an  yield  from  a  hundred  to  a  thousand 
merits,  only  with  regard  to  the  recitation  of  the  Qur’an  by  all  his  community,  with 
infinite numbers of lights entering the book of his deeds; — due to all these, the One 
All-Knowing  of  the  Unseen  saw  and  knew  that  the  Muhammadan  (PBUH)  Reality, 
which is his collective personality, would in the future be like a Tuba-tree of Paradise, 
and in accordance with that rank accorded him supreme importance in the Qur’an, and 
in  His  Decree  showed  the  following  of  him  and receiving of his intercession through 
adhering to his Illustrious  Sunna to be one of the most  important matters concerning 
man. And from time to time He took into  

 

272

consideration his human personality and human state in his early life, which was a seed 
of the majestic Tuba-tree. 

Thus,  since  the  truths  repeated  in the Qur’an are of this value, all sound natures 
will testify that in its repetitions is a powerful and extensive miracle. Unless, that is to 
say, a person is afflicted with some sickness of the heart and malady of the conscience 
due to the plague of materialism, and is included under the rule,  

A man denied the light of the sun due to his diseased eye,  
His mouth denied the taste of water due to sickness. 

TWO ADDITIONS, WHICH FORM A CONCLUSION 
TO THE TENTH TOPIC 

THE FIRST: Twelve years ago I heard that a fearsome and obdurate atheist had 
instigated  a  conspiracy  against  the  Qur’an,  which  was  to  have  it  translated.  He  said: 
“The Qur’an should be translated so that everyone can know just what it is.” That is, 
he hatched a dire plan with the idea of everyone seeing its unnecessary repetitions and 
its  translation  being  read  in  its  place.  However,  the irrefutable  proofs  of  the  Risale-i 
Nur proved decisively that “A true translation of the Qur’an is not possible, and other 
languages  cannot  preserve  the  Qur’an’s  qualities  and  fine  points  in  place  of  the 
grammatical  language  of  Arabic.  Man’s  trite  and  partial  translations  cannot  be 
substituted for the miraculous and comprehensive words of the Qur’an, every letter of 
which  yields  from  ten  to  a  thousand  merits;  they  may  not  be  read  in  its  place  in 
mosques.”  Through  spreading  everywhere,  the  Risale-i  Nur  made  the  fearsome  plan 
come  to  nothing.  I  surmise  that  it  was  due  to  the  idiotic  and  lunatic  attempts  of 
dissemblers  to extinguish  the  Sun  of  the  Qur’an  on  account of Satan by puffing at it 
like  silly  children  having  taken  lessons  from  that  atheist,  that  I  was  inspired  to  write 
this Tenth Matter while under great constraint and in a most distressing situation. But 
I do not know the reality of the situation since I have been unable to meet with others. 
SECOND ADDITION:  After our release from Denizli Prison, I was staying on 
the  top  floor  of  the  famous  Shehir  Hotel.  The  subtle  and  graceful  dancing  of  the 
leaves, branches, and trunks of the many poplar trees in the fine gardens opposite me 
at the touching of the breeze, each with a rapturous and ecstatic motion like a circle of 
dervishes, pained my heart, sorrow 

 

273

ful  and  melancholy  at  being  parted  from  my  brothers  and  remaining  alone.  Suddenly 
the seasons of autumn and winter came to mind and a heedlessness overcame me. I so 
pitied those graceful poplars and living creatures swaying with perfect joyousness that 
my eyes filled with tears. With this reminder of the separations and non-being beneath 
the ornamented veil of the universe, the grief at a world-full of deaths and separations 
pressed down on me. Then suddenly, the Light the Muhammadan (PBUH) Reality had 
brought came to my assistance and transformed my grief and sorrow into joy. Indeed, 
I  am  eternally  grateful  to  the  Muhammadan  Being  (PBUH)  for  the  assistance  and 
consolation  which  alleviated  my  situation  at  that  time,  only  a  single  instance  of  the 
boundless  effulgence  of  that  Light  for  me,  like  for  all  believers  and  everyone. It was 
like this:  

By  showing  those  blessed  and  delicate  creatures  to  be  without  function  or 
purpose, and their motion to be not out of joy, but as though trembling on the brink of 
non-existence  and  separation  and  tumbling  into  nothingness,  that  heedless  view  so 
touched  the  feelings  in  me  of  desire  for  immortality,  love  of  beautiful  things,  and 
compassion  for  fellow-creatures  and  life  that  it  transformed  the  world  into  a  sort  of 
hell  and  my  mind  into  an  instrument  of  torture.  Then,  just  at  that  point,  the  Light 
Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  by  upon  him)  had  brought  as  a  gift  for  mankind 
raised  the  veil;  it  showed  in  place  of extinction, non-being, nothingness, purposeless, 
futility, and separations, meanings and instances of wisdom to the number of the leaves 
of  the  poplars,  and as is proved in the Risale-i Nur, results and duties which may be 
divided into three sorts:  

The  First  Sort  looks  to  the  All-Glorious  Maker’s  Names.  For  example,  if  a 
master  craftsman makes a wondrous machine, everyone applauds him, saying: “What 
wonders  God  has  willed!  Blessed  be  God!”  Similarly,  the  machine  congratulates the 
craftsman through the tongue of its disposition, through displaying perfectly the results 
intended  from  it.  All  living  beings  and  all  things  are  machines  such  as  that;  they 
applaud their Craftsman through their glorifications. 

The  Second  Sort  of  the  Instances  of  Wisdom  looks  to  the  views  of  living 
creatures  and  conscious  beings.  Beings  each  become  an  agreeable  object  of  study,  a 
book of knowledge. They leave their meanings in the sphere of existence in the minds 
of conscious beings and their forms in their memories, and on the tablets in the World 
of Similitudes, and in the notebooks of the World of the Unseen, then they depart from 
the  Manifest  World  and  withdraw  to  the  World  of  the  Unseen.  That  is,  they  leave 
behind  an  apparent  existence,  but  gain  many  existences  pertaining  to  meaning,  the 
Unseen,  and  knowledge.  Yes,  since  God  exists  and  His  knowledge  encompasses 
everything, in the view of reality, in the world of  

 

274

believers  there  is  surely  no  non-being,  extinction,  nothingness,  annihilation,  and 
transitoriness,  while  the  world  of  unbelievers  is  full  of  non-existence,  separation, 
nothingness, and transience. This is taught by the saying, which is on everyone’s lips, 
“For those for whom  God exists, everything exists; and for those for whom He does 
not exist, nothing exists; for them there is nothing.” 

IN SHORT: Just as belief saves man from eternal extinction at the time of death, 
so  it  saves  everyone’s  private  world  from  the  darknesses  of  annihilation  and 
nothingness. Whereas unbelief, and especially if it is absolute unbelief, both sends man 
and  his  private  world  to  non-existence  with  death,  and  casts  him  into  infernal 
darknesses. It transforms the pleasures  of life into bitter poisons. Let the ears ring of 
those who prefer the life of this world to that of the hereafter! Let them come and find 
a solution for this, or else let them enter belief and be saved from these dreadful losses! 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.39 

                                                                                        S a i d  N u r s i  

From your brother who is in much need  
of your prayers and misses you greatly, 

                                             

39 Qur’an, 2:32. 

 

275

A Letter From Husrev40 to Üstad Bediuzzaman Said Nursi 
Concerning the Tenth Topic 

My Dear and Esteemed Master, 
Endless thanks be to Almighty God that we have received ‘A Flower of Emirdag,’ 
the  Tenth  Topic  of  the  Fruits  of  Denizli,  which  has  ameliorated our grief at our two 
months’  separation  and  our  distress  at  having  been  unable  to  communicate,  and 
enumerates the virtues of the repetition of the Qur’an’s glorious, august, merciful and 
compassionate  verses,  which  infuse  our  hearts  with  fresh  life  and  breathe  into  our 
spirits  a  fresh  breeze,  and  explains  the  necessity,  significance,  and  reason  for  the 
repetitions,  and  is  too  a  brilliant  defence  of  the  Risale-i  Nur.  In  truth,  the  more  we 
receive the scent of this flower, so deserving of praise and appreciation, the yearning 
of  our  spirits  for  it  increased.  Just  as  how  in  the  face  of  the  difficulties  of  our  nine 
months’ imprisonment, the nine Topics of the Fruits Of Belief showed their beauty by 
contributing to our being released, so through pointing out the wonders of the concise 
miraculousness  of  the  Qur’an,  the  Tenth  Topic,  their  Flower,  again  exhibited  their 
beauty. 

Yes,  my  beloved  Master,  like  the  superb,  delicate  beauty  of  the  rose  makes  the 
beholder forget the thorns on its stem, so this luminous Flower has made us forget the 
distress of those nine months; it has made it as nothing. The manner of its writing does 
not  cloy  those  studying  it; it astounds the mind.  Of the many beauties it contains, by 
showing  fully  the  value  of the repetitions in the face of the treachery of ‘simplifying’ 
the Qur’an in people’s eyes by translating it, it has set forth its universal loftiness. The 
Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition being proved to be as fresh as though it was newly 
revealed, its followers adhering strongly to it every century and their perfect obedience 
to its commands and prohibitions; and its severe, awesome, and repeated threats to the 
oppressor  in  every  century,  and  its  compassionate  and  merciful  regard  for  the 
oppressed; and  

                                             

40 Husrev Altinbasak (1899-1977). One of Bediuzzaman’s leading students, who wrote out 
numerous copies of the Risale-i Nur with his exceptionally fine handwriting. He also wrote copies of 
the Qur’an showing the ‘coincidences’ (tawafuqat) of the word ‘Alla\h’, an aspect of its 
miraculousness which Bediuzzaman ‘discovered.’ He was together with Bediuzzaman in the prisons 
of Eskishehir, Denizli, and Afyon. [Tr.] 

 

276

among  its  threats  which  look  to  this  century,  the  tyrants  being  made  to  cry  out 
continuously for the last six or seven years at the heavenly hell which recalls a sample 
of deepest space; and the Risale-i Nur students being at the head of the oppressed this 
century;  and  their  being  delivered  from  their  plights,  personal  and  general,  truly  like 
the  prophets  of  old  found  deliverance;  and  its  pointing  out  the  blows  dealt  to  the 
irreligious, its opponents, and Hellish torments;  and the Flower being concluded with 
two fine and subtle addenda; all these prompted this wanting student of yours, Husrev, 
to joyfully offer endless thanks. As I have mentioned to my dear Master, I have never 
experienced in my life the joy and happiness this beautiful Flower gives me, as I have 
told  my  brothers  on  numerous  occasions.  Almighty  God  placed  on  their  feeble 
shoulders a great and heavy load. May God be pleased with our beloved Master, and 
may He make them smile eternally by lightening their load. Amen! 

Yes,  my  dear  Master! We  are  forever  pleased  at  God,  the Qur’an, His Beloved, 
the Risale-i Nur, and at you, our beloved Master, who is herald of the Qur’an. We in 
no way regret our following you. We harbour absolutely no intention in our hearts to 
do harm; we seek only God and His pleasure. As time passes, we increase our longing 
to  meet  God  within  the  bounds  of  His  pleasure.  To  refer  to  Almighty  God  without 
exception  those  who  have  done  us  evil  and  to  forgive  them,  and  to  do  good  to 
everyone  including  those  tyrants  is  a  mark  of  Islam  established  in  the  hearts  of  the 
Risale-i  Nur  students.  We  offer  endless  thanks  to  God,  Who  proclaims  this  without 
our asking. 

                                                                 Your very faulty student, 

                                                                            H u s r e v 

 

277

The Eleventh Topic 

 [Hundreds  of  the  innumerable  fruits, particular and universal, of the sacred 
tree  of  belief,  one  of  which  is  Paradise,  another,  eternal  happiness,  and 
another, the vision of God, have been set forth with proofs and explanations 
in  the  Risale-i  Nur.  Referring  further  explanation  of  them  to  Siracü’n-Nur 
(The  Illuminating Lamp), therefore, here shall be set out a few examples of 
its particular and special fruits, rather than its universal pillars.] 

One  of  these:  One  day  while  reciting  in  a  supplication:  “O  My  Sustainer!  In 
veneration  of  Gabriel,  Michael,  Israfil,  and  Azra’il,  and  through  their  intercession, 
preserve me from the evil of men and jinn,” I experienced an exceedingly pleasant and 
consoling  state  of  mind  on  mentioning  the  name  of  Azra’il,  which  generally  makes 
people  tremble  in  fear.  “All  praise be  to  God!” I exlaimed, and began to feel earnest 
love for him. I shall point out extremely briefly only one particular fruit of the many of 
this particular aspect of the pillar of belief in the angels. 

Another: Everyone’s most precious possession and the one over which they most 
tremble, is their spirit. I felt sure that to surrender it to a strong and trustworthy hand 
thereby preserving it from being lost and annihilated and from aimlessness, afforded a 
profound joy. Then the angels who record men’s actions came to mind; I saw that they 
yielded numerous sweet fruits like the previous one. 

Another:  Everyone  tries  earnestly  to  preserve  through  writing,  poetry,  or  even 
the cinema, a worthwhile saying or deed, in order to immortalize it. Particularly if the 
deeds  produce  everlasting  fruits  in  Paradise,  they  are  even  more  anxious  to  preserve 
them. The recording angels hovering over men’s shoulders so that they may show their 
deeds in eternal vistas and continually gain their owners reward, seemed so agreeable 
to me, I cannot describe it. 

Then,  when  ‘the  worldly’  had  isolated  me  from  everything  to  do  with  social life 
and kept me from all my books, friends, assistants, and the things that console me, and 
I was being crushed by the desolation of exile and my empty world was tumbling down 
all around me, one of the many fruits of belief in the angels came to my assistance. It 
cheered up the uni 

 

278

verse and my world, filling it with angels and spirit beings, and making my world laugh 
for  joy.41  It  showed  too  that  the  worlds  of  the  people  of  misguidance  weep  in 
desolation,  emptiness,  and  darkness.  While  enjoying  the  pleasures  of  this  fruit,  my 
imagination  plucked  one  of  the  numerous  fruits  of  belief  in  the  prophets,  which 
resembles  it,  and  tasted  it.  Then  suddenly  my  belief  that  all  the  prophets  of  the  past 
were  as  though  living,  and  my  assent to  them, lit up those times and made my belief 
universal  and  expanded  it,  and  set  thousands  of  signatures  to  their  teachings 
concerning belief in the Prophet of the End of Time (PBUH), silencing the Satans. 

Then,  a  question  occurred  to  me the decisive answer to which is included in the 
Thirteenth  Flash,  about  the  wisdom  in  seeking  refuge  with  God  from  Satan.  In 
meaning  it  asked  me:  “The  people  of  guidance  are  assisted  and  strengthened  by 
innumerable sweet fruits and benefits like these, the fine results of good deeds, and the 
Most  Merciful  of  the  Merciful’s  compassionate  succour  and  assistance,  so  why  are 
they  frequently  defeated  by  the  people  of  misguidance,  and  sometimes  twenty  or  a 
hundred  of  them  are routed?” While pondering over this, I recalled the mobilizations 
and  angels  in  the  Qur’an  in  the  face  of  Satan’s  feeble  machinations,  and  Almighty 
God’s sending assistance to the people of belief. Since the Risale-i Nur has explained 
the  purpose  and  wisdom  of  this  with  decisive  proofs,  we  shall  here  allude  to  it  only 
briefly. 

Yes, sometimes in the face of a single vandal trying to set fire to a palace which a 
hundred men have made, the palace can remain standing only through a hundred men 
protecting it and by having recourse to the government and the king. For its existence 
is  possible  only  through  the  existence  of  all  its  conditions  and  causes,  but  its  non-
existence  and  destruction  may occur through the non-existence of a single condition. 
Just  as  the  palace  may  be  burnt  to  the  ground  by  a  layabout  with  a  single match, so 
with some small actions, satans from among jinn and men cause vast destruction and 
terrible non-physical conflagrations. Yes, the basis and origin of all bad, evils and sins 
is  non-existence,  it  is  destruction.  The  non-existence  and  destruction  are  concealed 
beneath  apparent  existence.  Thus,  relying  on  this  point,  satans  from  among  jinn  and 
men and evil beings withstand an infinite force with an extremely weak force, driving 
the  people  of  truth  and  reality to continually seek  refuge at the Divine Court, and to 
flee to it. The Qur’an therefore mobilizes great forces for their protection. It gives for 
their  use  ninety-nine  Divine  Names,  and  commands  them  sternly  to  withstand  those 
enemies. 

From this answer became apparent the tip of a vast truth and basis of  

                                             

41 Musnad, v, 173; al-Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 9; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 19. 

 

279

an awesome matter. It was like this: just as Paradise bears the crops of all the worlds 
of  existence  and  produces  the  eternal  shoots  of  the  seeds  grown  in  this  world;  so  in 
order to display the grievous consequences of the innumerable terrible worlds of non-
existence  and  nothingness,  Hell  scorches  up  the  products  of  that  non-existence,  and 
among its other functions, that terrible factory cleanses the universe of existence of the 
filth  of  the  world  of  non-existence.  For  now  we  shall  not  open  the  door  of  this 
awesome matter; God willing, it shall be elucidated later. 

Another  particular  and  example  of  the  fruit  of  belief  in  the  angels  concerns  the 
questioning  angels,  Munkar  and  Nakir;42  it  is  this:  in  my  imagination  I  entered  my 
grave,  telling  myself:  “I  am  bound  to  enter  here,  the  same  as  everyone  else.”  While 
taking  fright  at  the  bleakness  and  despair  of  the  lonely,  dark,  cold,  narrow  solitary 
confinement of the grave, two blessed friends resembling Munkar and Nakir appeared. 
They  began  to  debate  with  me.  My  heart  and  grave  were  broadened,  illumined,  and 
warmed; windows were opened up onto the world of spirits. I felt truly happy at that 
situation which I saw in the imagination then, and will see in reality in the future, and I 
offered thanks. 

A  medrese  student  who  was  studying  Arabic  grammar  died  and  in  replying  to 
Munkar and Nakir’s question of “Who is your Sustainer?”, thought he was in his own 
medrese  and  said:  “‘Who’  is  the  subject,  ‘your  Sustainer’  is  its  predicate;  ask  me 
something  difficult;  that’s  easy.”  It  made  both  the  angels,  and  the  spirits  who  were 
present, and a diviner of graves who witnessed the incident, laugh, and brought a smile 
to Divine mercy. Being delivered from torment, the late Hafiz Ali, a martyr hero of the 
Risale-i Nur, died in prison while writing out and enthusiastically studying the treatise 
of  The Fruits of Belief. Just as he replied in the grave to the questioning angels with 
the truths of The Fruits of Belief —as he had in court here—, so I and the Risale-i Nur 
students  shall  reply  to  those  questions  with  the  brilliant  and  powerful  proofs  of  the 
Risale-i  Nur,  in  the  future  in  fact  and  now  in  meaning,  and  will  cause  the  angels  to 
confirm them and appreciate them and congratulate them; God willing.  

Another small example of belief in the angels leading to worldly happiness is this: 
an  innocent  child  who  had  learnt  his  lesson  from the Ilm-i  Hal,  said to another child 
who  was  wailing  at  the  death  of  his  little  brother:  “Don’t  cry,  be  thankful,  because 
your  brother  has  gone  to  heaven  and  is  with the angels. He is enjoying himself there 
and having a better time than us. He is flying around like the angels, and taking a look 
at everything.” He turned his friend’s woeful tears into happy smiles. 

                                             

iii, 126; iv, 288. 

42 al-Tirmidhi, Jana’iz, 70; Abu Da’ud (in meaning), ii, 540, 541; Ibn Maja, Jana’iz, 65; Musnad, 

 

280

Exactly  like  that  weeping  child,  in  the  grim  situation  of  this  sorrowful  winter  I 
received news of two deaths. One was my nephew, the late Fuad, who had both come 
first in advanced schools, and had published the truths of the Risale-i Nur. The second 
was  my  late  sister,  called  Hanim,  a  scholar  who  went  on  the  Hajj  and  died  while 
circumambulating the Ka‘ba. These deaths of two relatives made me weep, like that of 
the  late  Abdurrahman,  which  is  described  in  the  Treatise  For  The  Elderly.  Then, 
through  the  light  of  belief  I  saw  in  my  heart  that  the  innocent  Fuad  and  righteous 
Hanim  had  as  companions  angels  and  houris  in  place  of  humans  and  had been saved 
from the perils and sins of this world. Feeling overwhelming joy instead of that searing 
sorrow, I congratulated both them,  and Fuad’s father, Abdülmecid, and myself, and I 
offered thanks to the Most Merciful of the Merciful. This has been included here as a 
prayer for mercy for the two departed. 

All the comparisons and allegories in the Risale-i Nur describe the fruits of belief 
that have as their consequences happiness in this world and the next. In respect of the 
happiness and pleasures of life they display in this world, those universal and extensive 
fruits give news that they will gain for man everlasting happiness, indeed, that they will 
produce shoots and develop in that way. Five of those numerous universal fruits have 
been written at the end of the Thirty-First Word as fruits of the Ascension, and five are 
included as examples in the Fifth Branch of the Twenty-Fourth Word. 

We said  at the beginning that each of the pillars of faith have numerous different 
fruits,  even  innumerable  fruits,  and  that  similarly,  a  single  fruit  of  the  totality  of  the 
fruits is vast Paradise, and another is eternal happiness, while another and perhaps the 
sweetest  is  the  vision  of  God.  Also  some  of  the  fruits  of  belief  yielding  happiness  in 
both worlds, this world and the hereafter, have been well described in the comparison 
at the end of the Thirty-Second Word. 

Evidence  that  belief  in  Divine  Determining  yields  precious  fruits  in  this  world  is 
the  fact  that  the  saying  “those  who  believe  in  Divine  Determining  are  saved  from 
unhappiness”  is  widely  known  as  a  proverb.  Two  universal  fruits  of  belief  in  Divine 
Determining are explained in the fine comparison at the end of the Treatise On Divine 
Determining, which is about two men who enter the lovely garden of a palace, and I 
myself in my own life have experienced thousands of times and understood that if one 
does  not  believe in Divine Determining, it destroys the happiness of this worldly life. 
But  whenever,  in  grievous  misfortunes,  I  looked  from  the  point  of  view  of  Divine 
Determining, I saw that they were greatly  

 

281

lightened, and I would be astonished at how those who do not believe it can continue 
to live. 

One of the universal fruits of the pillar of belief in the  angels is alluded to in the 
Second  Station  of  the  Twenty-Second  Word  like  this:  supplicating  Almighty  God, 
Azra’il (Peace be upon him) said:  

“Your servants  will be vexed at me and complain about me when I carry out my 

duty of seizing the spirits of the dying.” 

He was told in reply: “I shall make illnesses and calamities a veil to your duties, so 

my servants’ complaints will be directed at them and not at you.” 

Azra’il’s  duty  is  a  veil  in  exactly  the  same  way  that  the  above  are  veils,  so  that 
unjustified complaints are not directed at Almighty God. For not everyone can see the 
aspects of wisdom, mercy, beauty, and advantage in death; they see its apparent face 
and  start  to  object  and  complain.  Azra’il  was  made  a  veil  so  that  these  unjustified 
complaints are not directed at the Absolutely Compassionate One. In exactly the same 
way, the function of all the angels, indeed of all apparent causes, is to be veils to the 
dignity  of  dominicality,  so  that  the  dignity  and  holiness  of  Divine  power  and 
comprehensiveness of Divine mercy are preserved in things the beauty of which is not 
apparent  and  the  wisdom  of  which  is  not  understood;  and  they  are  not  the  target  of 
objections, and so that in the superficial view Divine power does not appear to be in 
contact with base, trivial, or cruel things. For the Risale-i Nur has proved definitively 
with innumerable evidences that the stamps of Divine unity on all things show clearly 
that  no  cause  has  an  actual  effect  or  the  ability  to  create.  Creation  and the giving of 
existence are particular to Him. Causes are merely a veil. Conscious beings like angels 
can do nothing other than a sort of voluntary duty in accordance with their natures and 
active worship which is called ‘acquisition,’ and is insignificant and not creative. 

Yes, dignity and grandeur demand that in the view of the mind causes are veils to 
the  hand  of power. While unity and oneness demand that causes abstain from having 
any real effect. 

Just  as  angels  and  the  apparent  causes  employed  in  good  works  pertaining  to 
existence  are all  means  of exonerating dominical power of fault and tyranny in things 
the beauties of which are not known or seen, and of hallowing it and preserving it from 
the  ascription  of  fault;  so  too,  satans  from  among  jinn  and  men  and  harmful  matters 
being employed in evil matters pertaining to non-existence is to hallow and glorify God 
by saving Divine power from being the target of complaint and wrongful accusations 
of cruelty. It is to exonerate Him and declare Him free of all the  

 

282

faults  in  the  universe.  For  all  faults  arise  from  non-existence,  or  lack  of  ability,  or 
destruction,  or  the  failure  to  perform  duties,  which  are  all  non-existence  and  acts 
which  are  not  existent  and  pertain  to  non-existence.  The  faults  are  ascribed  to  these 
satanic  and  evil  veils,  the  objections  and  complaints  are  deservedly  directed  at  them, 
and they are means of Almighty God being pronounced free of all defect. 

In  any  event,  strength  or  power  are  not  necessary  for  evil  destructive  works 
pertaining  to  non-existence;  sometimes  extensive  non-existence  or  destruction  may 
occur through some petty act or insignificant power, or even the failure to perform a 
duty.  It is supposed those doers of evil possess power,  but they have no effect other 
than  non-existence  and  no  power  other  minor  ‘acquisition.’  But  since  the  evils  arise 
from non-existence, the doers of evil are the true agents. If they are intelligent beings, 
they  deservedly  pay  the  penalty.  That  is  to  say,  in  evils  the  perpetrators  are  the true 
‘doers,’  but  since good deeds and acts are existent, those who ‘do’ them are not the 
true ‘doers’ and do not have an actual effect. They are recipients rather, receiving the 
Divine effulgence; the All-Wise Qur’an states that their reward too is purely a Divine 
favour, and says: 

Whatever good happens to you is from God but whatever evil befalls you is 
from yourself.43  

I n   S h o r  t : While the universes of existence and the innumerable worlds of 
non-existence  clash,  producing  fruits  like  Paradise  and  Hell;  and  all  the  worlds  of 
existence  declare: “All praise be to God! All praise be to God!” and all the worlds of 
non-existence declare: “Glory be to God! Glory be to God!”; and while through an all-
encompassing law of contest angels and satans, and instances of good and instances of 
evil, as far as the inspirations and satanic whisperings of the heart, all struggle against 
each other; a fruit of belief in the angels is suddenly manifested, solving the matter and 
illuminating the universe. Showing us one of the lights of the verse,  
God is the Light of the heavens and the earth,44  

it shows us just how sweet is this fruit. 

The  Twenty-Fourth  and  Twenty-Ninth  Word —the latter of which demonstrates 

the marvels of the ‘alifs’45— point out a second universal  

                                             

43 Qur’an, 4:79. 
44 Qur’an, 24:35. 
45 This refers to the non-intentional alignment in patterns (tawafuq) of alifs (the first letter of the 
Arabic alphabet, written as a vertical stroke) in handwritten copies of the Twenty-Ninth Word. [Tr.] 

 

283

fruit,  and  prove  in  brilliant  fashion  the  existence  and  functions  of  the  angels.  Yes,  in 
everything  in  the  universe,  particular  and  universal,  in  every  realm  of  being,  is  a 
compassionate,  splendid  dominicality  which  makes  itself  known  and  loved.  Most 
certainly  it  is  necessary  to  respond  to  that  splendour,  that  compassion,  that  making 
known and loved, with thanks and comprehensive, conscious worship, declaring them 
to  be  free  of  all  fault.  And  it  is  only  countless  angels  that  can  perform  the  duty  on 
behalf  of  unconscious  inanimate  creatures  and  the  great  elements,  and  can  represent 
the  wise,  majestic  activity  of  the  sovereignty  of  that  dominicality  everywhere  on the 
earth, on the Pleiades, in the foundations of the earth, and outside it. 

Through  this  fruit,  for  example,  the  creation  of  the  earth  and  its  natural  duties, 
which  the  soulless  laws  of  philosophy  show  to  be  dark  and  desolate,  are  placed  in 
luminous  familiar  fashion  on  the  shoulders  of,  that  is,  under  the  supervision  of,  two 
angels  called  Thawr  (the  Bull)  and  Hut  (the  Fish).46  And  a  truth,  a  substance  of  the 
hereafter  called  sakhra  is  sent  as  an  everlasting  foundation  stone  of  the  transitory 
earth,  that  is,  as  a  sign  that  in  the  future  part  of  it  will  be  transformed  into  eternal 
Paradise,  and  is  made  a  point  of  support  for  the  angels  Thawr  and  Hut.  This  was 
narrated  by  the  old  prophets  of  the  Children  of  Israel,  and  also  by  Ibn  ‘Abbas. 
Unfortunately,  in  the  course  of  time,  this  sacred  meaning  and  allegory  was  taken 
literally  by  the  ordinary  people  and  acquired  a  form  outside  the  bounds  of  reason. 
Since the angels travel through earth and rock and the centre of the earth the same as 
they do through the air, they, and the earth, surely have no need of physical rocks and 
a fish and ox to support them. 

Also for example, since the globe utters Divine glorifications to the number of its 
realms of beings, with tongues to the number of the members of those species, and to 
the parts, leaves, and fruits of those members, surely there will be an appointed angel 
with forty thousand heads and forty thousand tongues in each head, each of which will 
utter forty thousand Divine glorifications, which will know that splendid, unconscious, 
innate  worship,  represent  it  consciously,  and  offer  it  to  the  Divine  Court,  as  the 
Bringer of Sure News informed us absolutely correctly. 

Also, the existence and extraordinary nature of angels like Gabriel (Peace be upon  
him),  who  conveys  and  announces  the  dominical  relations  with  man,  the  most 
important result of the universe’s creation; and Israfil (Peace be upon him) and Azra’il 
(Peace be upon him), who merely represent the Creator’s most awesome  

                                             

46 Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur, i, 329. 

 

284

actions in the world of animate beings, which are the raising to life and giving of life, 
and the release from duties with death, and they supervise them in worshipful manner; 
and  Michael  (Peace  be  upon  him)  who  besides  supervising  the  bounties  of  the  Most 
Merciful in food, which is the most extensive and most pleasurable mercy in the sphere 
of  life,  consciously  represents  unconscious  thanks — the existence and extraordinary 
nature of angels like these, and the immortality of their spirits, are necessitated by the 
sovereignty  and  splendour  of  dominicality.  Their  existence  and  that  of  their  own 
species  is  as  certain  and  free  of  doubt  as  the  existence  of  the  sovereignty  and 
splendour that are to be seen in the universe as clearly as the sun. Comparisons may be 
made with this for other matters concerning the angels.  

Yes,  the  All-Powerful  One  of  Glory  and  Beauty  created  four  hundred  thousand 
species  of  living  beings  on  the  earth,  and  created  beings  with  spirits  in  great 
abundance, even out of common and rotting substances, filling everywhere with them. 
In the face of the miracles of His art He causes them to declare: “What wonders God 
has willed! How great are God’s blessings! Glory be to God!”, and before the gifts of 
His  mercy:  “All  praise  be  to  God!  All  thanks  be  to God! God is Most Great!” Most 
certainly and without doubt therefore He created inhabitants and spirit beings suitable 
for  the vast heavens, who never rebel and perform constant worship. Not leaving the 
heavens  empty,  He  populated  them  with  these  beings.  He  created  too  countless 
different  sorts  of  angels,  far  greater  in  number  than  the  animal  species.  Some  in  tiny 
form,  mount raindrops and snowflakes  and  applaud the Divine art and mercy in their 
own  tongues.  Others  mount  the  travelling  stars  and  on  their  journeys through space, 
through their Divine exaltations and pronouncements of Divine Unity, proclaim to the 
world their worship before the grandeur, splendour and dignity of dominicality.  

The agreement of all the revealed scriptures and religions since the time of Adam 
concerning  the  existence  and  worship  of  the  angels,  and  the  numerous  unanimous 
reports in all ages of conversations and meetings of men with the angels, proves that 
their existence is as certain as the existence of the people of America, whom we have 
never seen, and that they are concerned with us. 

Now come and taste through the light of belief this second universal fruit; see how 
it fills the universe from end to end, making it beautiful and transforming it into a vast 
mosque and place of worship. In the face of science and philosophy showing it to be 
cold,  lifeless,  dark,  and  desolate,  it  shows  it  to  be  full  of  life  and  light,  conscious, 
familiar, and agreeable, allowing the people of belief to experience a manifestation of 
the pleasures of immortal life according to their degree, while still in this world. 

 

285

C o n c l u s i o n : Since through the mysteries of Divine unity and oneness, the 
same power, the same Names, the same wisdom, and the same art are found in every 
part  of  the  universe,  the  Creator’s  unity,  disposal,  giving  of  existence,  dominicality, 
creativity,  and  sacredness  are  proclaimed  through  the  tongues  of  disposition  of  all 
creatures,  particular  and  universal.  So  too  He  created  the  angels,  and  caused  the 
glorifications  which  all  creatures  offer  unconsciously  through  the  tongues  of  their 
beings  to  be  offered  consciously  through the worshipful tongues of the angels. None 
of the angels’ actions are in any respect contrary to the Divine command. Apart from 
pure worship, they do nothing; they bring nothing into being, can intervene in nothing 
unless  commanded,  and  cannot  intercede  even, without permission. They manifest to 
the utmost the meaning of:  

They  are  [but]  servants  raised  to  honour.  *  They  speak  not  before  He 
speaks, and they act [in all things] by His command.47 

                                             

47 Qur’an, 21:26-7. 

 

286

Conclusion 

 [This forms a brief indication to a lengthy truth concerning a subtle point of 
miraculousness  of  great  importance  which  was  imparted  to  me  after  sunset 
and demonstrates  clearly miraculous predictions of Sura al-Falaq concerning 
the Unseen.] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Say:  I  seek  refuge  with  the  Sustainer  of  the  rising  dawn * From the evil of 
aught  that  He  has  created,  *  And  from  the  evil  of  the  black  darkness 
whenever  it  descends,  *  And from the evil of blowers on knots, * And from 
the evil of the envious when he envies.48 

Commanding  God’s  Messenger  (PBUH)  and  his  community  to  “Protect 
yourselves  from  the  evil  beings  and  satans  among  jinn  and  men  who  strive  in  the 
universe on account of the worlds of non-being,” this mighty, wondrous verse looks to 
all ages, and through its allusive meaning looks to a greater degree to our strange age, 
even  explicitly,  and  calls  on  the  Qur’an’s  servants  to  seek  refuge  with  God.  This 
miraculous  prediction  about  the  Unseen  will  be  explained  briefly  in  five  signs,  as 
follows: 

All the verses of this sura have numerous meanings. Only in respect of its allusive 
meaning,  its  repeating  the  word  “evil”  four  times  in  five  sentences;  and  with  a 
powerful  relation  and  in  four  ways  its  pointing  the  finger  with  the  same  date  to  the 
four  unparalleled,  ghastly,  stormy  evils,  material  and  immaterial,  of  this  age,  with  its 
revolutions and clashes, and its implicitly giving the command: “withdraw from these;” 
is certainly guidance from the Unseen in a way befitting the Qur’an’s miraculousness. 

For  example,  the  sentence  Say:  I  seek  refuge  with  the  Sustainer  of  the  dawn 
‘coincides’ with the date 1352 or 1354 according to abjad and jafr reckoning, alluding 
to  the  Second World  War,  which  was  brewing  up  then  erupted  due  to  the  prevalent 
ambition  and  greed  of  mankind  and  the  First  War,  and  in  effect  saying  to  the 
community of Muhammad (PBUH): “Do not enter this war, but seek refuge with your 
Sustainer.”  With  another  of  its  allusive  meanings,  as  a  special  favour  to  the  Risale-i 
Nur  students,  who  are  servants  of  the  Qur’an,  it  hints  to  them  that  they  were  to  be 
saved around the same date from Eskishehir Prison and an awesome evil, and that the 
plans  to  eliminate  them  would  come  to nothing.  It  was as though commanding them 
symbolically to seek refuge with God. 

                                             

48 Qur’an, 113:1-5. 

 

287

And  for  example,  the  sentence  “From  the  evil  of  aught  that  He  has  created” 
makes 1361 —the doubled ra is not counted— and points the finger through both the 
Rumi  and  Hijri  dates  at  the  cruel,  tyrannical  destruction  of  this  unmatched  war. 
‘Coinciding’  too  with  the  Risale-i  Nur  students,  who  work  with  all  their  strength  to 
serve the Qur’an, being delivered from an extensive plan to eliminate them and from a 
grievous  calamity  and  Denizli  Prison,  it  looks  with  an  allusive  meaning to  them  too. 
With a concealed sign it says: “Protect yourselves from the evil of creatures.” 

And for example, making 1328 if the doubled letters are not counted and 1358 if 
the  doubled  lam  is  counted,  the  sentence  the  blowers  on  knots  ‘coincides’  with  the 
dates  when  due  their  ambition  and  greed  the  Europeans  tyrants  who  caused  the  two 
World  Wars,  instigated  a  change  of  Sultan  and  the Balkan and Italian Wars with the 
idea of spoiling the consequences of the Constitutional Revolution, which favoured the 
Qur’an; then with the outbreak of the First World War, through the political diplomats 
blowing  their  evils,  material  and  immaterial  and  their  sorcery  and  poison  into 
everyone’s  heads  through  the  tongue  of  the  radio  and  their  inculcating  their  covert 
plans  into  the  heart  of  human  destiny,  they  prepared  the  evils  that  would  savagely 
destroy  a  thousand  years  of  the  progress  of  civilization,  which  corresponds  exactly 
with the meaning of “the blowers on knots.” 

And  for  example,  the  sentence  And  from  the  evil  of  the  envious when he envies 
makes  1347  —the  doubled  ra  and  tanwin  are  not  counted—  and  coincides  exactly, 
and  corresponds  in  meaning,  with  the  significant  upheavals  which  occurred  in  this 
country due to the enforced European treaties, and the changes that took place in this 
religious  nation  due  to  the  oppression  of  philosophy,  and  the  awesome  envy,  rivalry 
and  clashes  in  various  countries  which  paved  the  way  for  the  Second  World  War. 
These  are  surely  flashes  of  this  sacred  sura’s  miraculous  predictions  concerning  the 
Unseen. 

A Reminder 

All Qur’anic verses have numerous meanings. And all the meanings are universal; 
they  have  significations  in  every  century.  Those  discussed  here  are  only  its  level  of 
allusive meaning which looks to our century. Within that universal meaning our age is 
one  signification.  But  it  has  gained  particularity,  and  looks  to  it  and  its  date.  Since 
these  last  four  years  I  have  known  neither  the  stages  of  the  war,  nor  its  results,  nor 
whether or not peace has been declared, and I have not asked, I have not knocked on 
the door of this sacred sura to learn how many allusions it contains to this century and 
its wars. It has however been proved and  

 

288

explained  in  various  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  especially  in Rumûzât-i Semaniye 
(The  Eight  Symbols),  that  this  treasury  contains  many  more  mysteries,  so  referring 
readers to those, I am cutting this short. 

The answer to a question that might occur to one 

In this flash of miraculousness, in the From the evil of aught that He has created 
at  the  beginning,  both the  from  (min)  and  the  evil (sharr) being counted, and in and 
from  the  evil  of  the  envious  when  he  envies  at  the  end,  only  the  word  evil  (sharr) 
being  counted,  and  and  from  (wa  min)  not  being  counted,  and  in  neither  of  these 
words  being  counted  in  and from the evil of the blowers on knots (wa min sharr al-
naffathat fi’l-‘uqad) is a sign indicating an extremely subtle relationship. For there is 
good as well as evil in people (khalq), and not all evil is visited on everyone. Alluding 
to this, from (min) and evil (sharr), which are partitive, are counted. But the envier is 
altogether evil when he envies, so there is no need for the partitive. And according to 
the allusion of the blowers on knots, there is no need for the word evil to be counted 
here, for all the works of those casters of spells and sorcerer diplomats who have set 
the globe ablaze for their own benefits are pure evil. 

An addendum to a point about the miraculousness of this sura 

Just as with four of its five sentences, this sura looks with its allusive meaning to 
the four largest evil revolutions and storms this century; so, with its allusive meaning 
and according to jafr reckoning, by its repeating four times the phrase from the evil of 
(min  sharri)  —the  doubling  is  not  counted,  it  looks  to  and  points  the  finger  at  the 
century  of  the  dissension  of  Jenghiz  Khan  and  Hulagu and the time of the fall of the 
‘Abbasid  dynasty,  which  was  the  most  fearsome  calamity  experienced  by the  Islamic 
world. 

Yes,  without  doubling,  the  evil  (sharri)  makes  500,  and  from  (min)  is  90. 
Numerous verses which look to the future, as well as Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased 
with him) and Ghawth al-A‘zam (May his mystery be sanctified), who alluded to both 
our century and those times in their predictions of the future, saw both our century and 
that century and made predictions in exactly the same way. With ghasiq making 1161 
and idha waqab making 810, the words (ghasiq idha waqab) look not to these times, 
but to the significant material and immaterial evils of those times. If they are counted 
together, they make 1971, and give news of some ghastly evil at that date. If the crops 
of the seeds of the present are not rectified, the blows will certainly be terrible. 

 

289

A Supplement 
to the Addendum of the Eleventh Topic 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
The  verse,  Let  there  be  no  compulsion  (in  religion;  Truth  stands  out)  from 
error,49  which  is  the  complement  of  the  Throne  Verse,  makes 1350; whoever  rejects 
evil makes 1929 or 1928; and believes in God has grasped makes 946, corresponding 
to the name ‘Risaletü’n-Nur;’ the most trustworthy handhold makes 1347; that never 
breaks,  and  God  is  All-Seeing,  All-Knowing  *  (God)  (is  the  Protector  of  those  who 
have faith) if counted together makes 1012, and if not counted together 945, with one 
doubling not being counted; from (the depths of darkness) He will lead them forth into 
the light makes 1372, without doubling; while those who do not believe, their patrons 
are  (the  evil  ones)  makes  1417;  from  the  light  (they  will  lead  them  forth  into)  the 
depths  of  darkness  makes  1338,  the  doubling  is  not  counted;  they  will  be  the 
companions  of  the  Fire,  to  dwell  therein  for  ever  makes  1295,  the  doubling  is 
counted. 

It  was  imparted  to  me  that  with  their  allusive  meanings,  these  verses  ‘coincide’ 
exactly  and  twice  with  both  the  name  of  the  Risaletü’n-Nur  and  the  form  of  its 
striving;  and  with  the  date  the  people  of  unbelief  were  attempting  to  extinguish  the 
light  of  the  World  of  Islam  with  the  war  of  1293  (1876-77);  and  with  the  date  the 
terrible  treaties  were  signed  in  1338  taking  advantage  of the First World War and in 
order to cast it into darkness in fact. It was imparted to me too that light and darkness 
are  repeatedly  contrasted  in  these  verses,  and  in  this  immaterial  struggle  a  Light 
proceeding from the Qur’an’s light would become a point of support for the people of 
belief. I was compelled to set this down in writing. Then I saw that the relationship of 
its  meaning  with  this  century  was  so  powerful  that  even  had  there  been  no  sign 
through  the  ‘coincidences,’  I  would  still  have  been  certain  that  these  verses  were 
speaking with us through their allusive meanings, just as they look to all centuries. 

Yes,  firstly,  the  sentence  at  the  beginning,  Let  there  be  no  compulsion  (in 
religion; Truth stands out) from error points through abjad and jafr reckoning to the 
date 1350 [if Rumi, 1934, or if Hijri, 1931-2], and  

                                             

49 Qur’an, 2:256-7. 

 

290

through  its  allusive  meaning,  says:  By  the  matters  of  religion  being  separated  from 
those of this world on that date, freedom of conscience, which is opposed to force and 
compulsion  in  religion,  and  to  religious  struggle  and  armed  jihad  for  religion,  was 
accepted  as  a  fundamental  rule  and  political  principle  by  governments,  and  this  state 
became a secular republic. In view of this, jihad will be a non-physical religious jihad 
with  the  sword  of  certain, verified belief. Because it shows a  flash of miraculousness 
indicating  that  a  light  will  emerge  from  the  Qur’an  which  will  make  known  and  set 
forth clearly proofs so powerful they will demonstrate almost visibly the guidance and 
truths of religion. 

Furthermore, as far as the word khalidun —to dwell therein for ever, by repeating 
the  contrast  between  light  and  darkness,  and  belief  and  darkness  —the  source  and 
origin  of  all  the  comparisons  in the  Risale-i  Nur  and  just  like  them—  is  a  concealed 
sign  that  a great hero in the contest of the ‘mânevî jihad’ at that date is the Risale-i 
Nur,  which  bears  the  name  of light. For its immaterial sword has solved hundreds of 
the mysteries of religion, leaving no need for physical swords. 

Yes,  countless  thanks  be  to  God,  for  twenty  years  the  Risale-i  Nur  has 
demonstrated  this  prediction  and  flash  of  miraculousness  in  fact.  It  is  due  to  this 
mighty mystery that Risale-i Nur students do not interfere in the politics and political 
currents of the world and their material struggles, nor attach importance to them, nor 
condescend to any involvement with them. Its true students say to their most fearsome 
enemies in the face of their insults and aggression: 

“You  wretch!  I  am  trying  to  save  you from eternal annihilation and to raise you 
from  the  basest  and  most  grievous  level  of  ephemeral  animality  to  the  happiness  of 
immortal humanity, while you are working for my death and execution. Your pleasures 
in this world are very few and fleeting and the penalties and torments you will suffer in 
the hereafter will be very great and very longlasting. For me, death will be a discharge 
from  duties.  Go  away!  I  am  not  going  to  bother  with  you,  do  whatever  you  like!” 
They  feel  not  anger  at  their  enemies,  but  pity  and  compassion.  They  try  to  reform 
them, in the hope they shall be saved. 

Secondly:  And  believes  in  God  has  grasped  has  grasped  the  most  trustworthy 
handhold. These two sacred sentences have a powerful relationship, and according to 
abjad  and jafr reckoning the first corresponds exactly with the name Risaletü’n-Nur, 
and the second corresponds in meaning, and according to jafr reckoning with its being 
realized  and  perfected  and  its  brilliant  conquests.  These  correspondences  are  an 
indication  that  this  century  at  this  date,  the  Risaletü’n-Nur  is  a  most  trustworthy 
handhold. That  

 

291

is, it is an unbreakable chain of great strength and a “rope of God (hablullah).” They 
inform through their  allusive meanings that those who lay hold of it and cling onto it 
will be saved. 

Thirdly:  Both  in  meaning  and  according  to  jafr  reckoning,  the  sentence  God  is 
the  Protector  of  those  who  have  faith  makes  an  allusion  to  the  Risaletü’n-Nur,  as 
follows.... 

(The curtain descended here and permission was not given to write it. It has been 

postponed to another time.) 

NOTE 

The reason permission was not given to write the remainder of this point for now 
is  that  it  touches  to  an  extent  on politics and this world, and we are prohibited from 
considering these. Yes, the verse, Man is indeed overweening50 looks to this ‘taghut’ 
and draws attention to it... 

                                                                           S a i d  N u r s i 

                                             

50 Qur’an, 96:6. 

 

292

Part of a letter from Husrev, the hero of the Risale-i Nur, 
in connection with the Eleventh Topic of the Fruits of Belief 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise. 

May the peace and mercy and blessings of God be upon you! 
My Beloved and Esteemed Master! 
With the great good it contains for this nation and country, with its Ninth Topic 
The  Fruits  of  Belief  was  not  only  the  means  of  salvation  of  its  students  while  in the 
midst  of  their  greatest enemies and the awesomely rebellious, but  also with its Tenth 
and Eleventh Topics, it applauded the Risale-i Nur students in particular on the ways 
of reality. Moreover, concerning the circumstances of the grave, which we are certain 
to enter, by making familiar that place under the earth, which makes everyone tremble 
and is a source of terror for the heedless in particular, where we will meet and speak 
with  the  angels;  it  made  us  happy  at  their  companionship,  and  dispelled  our  terrible 
fears about that first stopping-place, letting us breathe freely. In the hands of those like 
me  who  have  not  seen  that  luminous  life,  it  resembles  an  electric  lamp  whose  rays 
penetrate hundreds of thousands of years. It also resembles a model flower-garden, the 
scents of which are ever a source of delight. 

Yes, I suggest to our beloved Master that like students who everyday recite their 
lessons  to  their  teacher,  we  should  always  describe  to  our  beloved  Master  the 
effulgence  we  receive  from  the  Risale-i  Nur.  But  for  now  our  beloved  Master  is 
refraining from speaking. 

My  Dear  Master!  The  reality  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  the  beauty  of  the  Fruits,  and 
effulgence of its flowers have driven me to utter a few words, gratefully, in the name 
of  my  country,  and  have  breathed  life  into  many  hearts  which  speak  like  mine.  But 
now,  due  to  the  “flower”  of  the  Eleventh  Fruit  of  Belief,  the  steps  taken  against the 
Risale-i  Nur  in  our  area  and  the  hands  raised  against  it,  have  become  harsher  and 
stronger, and have been stirred into action. 

                                                                 Your humble student, 

                                                                           H u s r e v  

 

293

A letter written in the name of all the Risale-i Nur students in Isparta to 
offer congratulations for Ramadan, which has been amended  
in thirteen sections 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise. 

Our revered Master, who  through the effulgence of the Qur’an and truths of the 
Risale-i  Nur  and  aspirations  of  his  loyal  students  weeps  tears  of  blood  for  the  well-
being of the Islamic world in this world and the next... 

Who in these stormy days of the end of time is beset with more woes and ills than 
Job (Peace be upon him), and through the light of the Qur’an, the proofs of the Risale-
i  Nur  and  efforts  of  his  students  works  to  cure  the  ills  of  the  Islamic  world  like 
Luqman  the  Wise,  and  has  proved  with  thirty-three  verses  of  the  Qur’an  and  the 
wondrous  predictions  of  Imam  ‘Ali  and  the  Ghawth  al-A‘zam  that  the  Risale-i  Nur 
with its different parts is truth and reality... 

Who  although  he  is  himself  ill  and  elderly  and  weak  and  in  a  piteous  condition, 
more  than  anyone  sacrifices  his  life  for  the  World  of  Islam  and  responds  to  those 
wrong him with the truths of the Qur’an and proofs of the  Risale-i Nur, and through 
the loyalty of the Risale-i Nur students, with prayers and good works... 

Who  together  with  his  students  was  sent  to  prison  because one of his important 
works,  The  Supreme  Sign,  was printed, and through the guidance of the Qur’an and 
teachings  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  enthusiasm  of  his  students  turned  the  prison  in  a 
‘School of Joseph’ and place of learning, and was the cause of all the ignorant among 
us  there  learning  to  read  the  whole  Qur’an,  and  despite  being  elderly  and  weak, 
through  the  sacred  strength  of  the  Qur’an  and  solace  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  and 
endurance of his brothers, took on himself the loads of all of us, and through the Fruits 
of Belief and Defence Speeches which he wrote, the miraculousness of the Qur’an of 
Miraculous  Exposition,  and  the  powerful  proofs  of the Risale-i Nur, and sincerity of 
his  students,  with  Divine  permission  had  the  prison  door  opened  and  won  our 
acquittals, and made that day a festival for us and for the Islamic world, and proving 
that in truth the Risale-i Nur is “Light upon light,” won the right for it to be read and 
written out freely till the end of time... 

 

294

Who has proved with the sacred sustenance of the Qur’an of Mighty Stature and 
other-worldly food of the  Risale-i Nur and appetite of its students, that the World of 
Islam has need for the Risale-i Nur as it does for water and air, and that thousands of 
those who have read these treatises and written them out have entered the grave in a 
state  of  belief,  and  has  never  defeated  or  embarrassed  the  students  who  follow  him, 
and  through  the  heavenly  teachings of the Qur’an, the principles of the Risale-i Nur, 
the  intelligence  of  its  students,  and  the  Tenth  and  Eleventh  Topics  of  the  Fruits  of 
Belief  and  its  flowers  quenches  the  fires  of  separation  that  night  and  day  sear  our 
hearts, like the water of life and wine of Kawthar, filling them with joy and happiness... 
Who, in accordance with the certain promises and threats of the Qur’an of Mighty 
Stature and the certain discoveries of the Risale-i Nur and the observations of its late 
students  and  those  among  them  who  divine  the  happenings  of  the grave, has  for the 
believers  saved  death  —the  thing  most  feared  by  all  the  world—  from  being  eternal 
annihilation  and  transformed  it  into  a  discharge  from  duties  and  shown  that  for  the 
unbelievers and dissemblers it is eternal annihilation; has proved in accordance with the 
certain news of the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition, confirmed both by the thousand 
miracles  of  Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him)  and  its  forty  aspects  of 
miraculousness,  and  endorsed  by  the  proofs  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  —which  proceeds 
from  the  Qur’an—  which  have  defeated  even  its  most  obdurate  enemies  and  are 
submitted  to  by  the  Risale-i  Nur  students,  and  are  corroborated  too  by  many  signs, 
experiences, and convictions, that the terrifying, cold, dark and narrow grave is for the 
believers  a  pit  of  Paradise  and  a  door  onto  the  gardens  of  Paradise,  while  for  the 
disbelievers and dissembling atheists is a pit of Hell full of snakes and scorpions; and 
has  made  the  angels  called  Munkar  and  Nakir,  who  will  enter  there,  familiar 
companions for the people of truth and those who have taken the way of reality; and 
included  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  among  ‘students  of  the  religious  sciences,’  and 
discovered  on  the  death  of  the  late  heroic  martyr  Hafiz  Ali  that  they  reply  to  the 
questions  of  Munkar  and  Nakir  with  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  who  beseeches  Divine 
mercy that those of us who are still living will also reply with the Risale-i Nur... 

Who, through demonstrating an aspect of miraculousness pertaining to each of the 
forty levels of the Qur’an of Mighty Stature, and through it being the pre-eternal Word 
of  God,  and  through  the  works  The  Miraculousness  of  the  Qur’an  and  The  Eight 
Symbols  from  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  the  extraordinary  efforts  of  the  heroic  brothers 
and  students  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  like  the  chief  writer  of  the  ‘Rose  Factory,’  and 
through Husrev, one  

 

295

of  the  heroic  scribes  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  being  commanded  to  “write!”,  although  no 
one since the time of the Prophet (PBUH) had been able to write it in such miraculous 
fashion,  its  being  written  like  the  Qur’an  inscribed  on  the  Preserved  Tablet,  —  has 
proved in beautiful and brilliant fashion, never before seen or heard, that the Qur’an of 
Mighty  Stature  is  the  true  Word  of  God,  and  the  greatest  of  all  the  revealed  books, 
and  that  there  are  thousands  of  Sura  al-Fatiha’s  within  one  Sura  al-Fatiha,  and 
thousands of Sura al-Ikhlas’s within one Sura al-Ikhlas, and that its letters yield ten, a 
hundred, a thousand, and thousands of merits and good deeds... 

Who has proved, through the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition demonstrating its 
miraculousness for one thousand three hundred years and halting those who oppose it, 
and through the proofs of the Risale-i Nur that are so clear as to be almost visible, and 
through  the  diamond  pens  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  students,  that  the  Twenty-Fifth Word 
and  its  Addenda,  which  have  challenged  the  world  and  silenced  even  the  most 
obdurate, are miracles of the Qur’an in forty aspects... 

Who  has  proved  in  the  treatise  from  the  Risale-i  Nur  called  The  Miracles  of 
Muhammad  (PBUH)  thousands  of  miracles  showing  that  Muhammad  (Peace  and 
blessings be upon him) was a true Messenger, the lord of all the twenty-four thousand 
prophets,  and  the  most  virtuous  of  them,  and  through  the  Qur’an  of  Mighty  Stature 
proclaiming to the universe that God’s Noble Messenger (PBUH) was sent as a Mercy 
to All the Worlds, and the Risale-i Nur demonstrating from beginning to end that he 
was  a  Mercy  to  All  the  Worlds,  and  showing  even  to the blind that the Messenger’s 
deeds  and  conduct  are  the  finest  and  best  example  to  be  followed  in  the  world,  and 
through the testimony of calamities being lifted when the Risale-i Nur is disseminated 
in  Anatolia  and  other  countries,  and  disasters  occurring  when  it  is  silenced,  and 
through  the  firm  and  steadfast  attachment  to  their  work  of the Risale-i Nur students 
despite the extremely difficult circumstances, has shown how profitable it is to follow 
the practices of that Being (PBUH) and that to follow a single of his practices at this 
time  gains  the  reward  of  a  hundred  martyrs,  and has proved absolutely certainly that 
for twenty years the Risale-i Nur has repulsed the calamities and disasters that would 
otherwise have been visited on Anatolia, the same as alms-giving repels disaster! 

Now,  since  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  acquittal  has  filled  with  joy  foremost  our  beloved 
Master,  then  us  impotent,  faulty  students,  then  the  Islamic  world,  and  occasioned  a 
second  festival,  we  congratulate  you  on  this  great  festival  of  yours,  and  offering our 
congratulations for Ramadan and the Night  

 

296

of  Power,  the  third  festival,  we  beseech  Almighty  God  we  shall  see  many more, and 
imploring forgiveness for our faults and the faulty among us, we send the greetings of 
all here and kiss your blessed hands, and beseech your prayers, o our Master! 

                                                             The Risale-i Nur students 
                                                             in Isparta and its environs 

* * * 

To  modestly  reject  this  letter,  which  is  a  hundred  times  greater  than  my  due, 
would be ingratitude and an insult to the favourable opinions of all the students, while 
to accept it exactly as it is would tell of pride, egotism, and conceit. Therefore, adding 
thirteen  sections,  I  am  sending  you  a  copy  of  this  long  letter  written  by  the  Risale-i 
Nur’s  scribe  in  everyone’s  name,  both  by  way  of  thanks  and to  be  saved  from  pride 
and  ingratitude.  It  may  be  added  at  the  end  of  the  Eleventh  Topic  with  the  title:  ‘A 
letter  from  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  of  Isparta  and  its  environs.’  Although  I  have 
amended the letter in this way, twice a pigeon alighted at my window. It was going to 
enter,  but  saw  Ceylan’s  head  and  did  not.  Several  minutes  later,  another  alighted  in 
exactly  the  same  way.  It  too  saw  the  scribe’s  head  and  did  not  come  inside.  I  said: 
“Most  probably  these  are  bearers  of  good  news  like  the  sparrow  and  ‘kuddüs’  bird 
before. Or because we have written this letter like numerous other secret letters, they 
came to congratulate us on amending the auspicious letter in this way.” 

                                                                          S a i d   N u r s i 

 

297

The Twelfth Ray 
[Part of the Defence Speeches Given in Denizli Court]1 

... ... ... 
Yes,  we  are  a  society  and  we  are  a  society  which  every  century  has  had  three 
hundred  and  fifty  million  [now  one and a half thousand million] members. Every day 
through the five obligatory prayers, its members demonstrate with complete veneration 
their  attachment  to  the  principles  of  that  sacred  society.  Through  the  sacred 
programme of The believers are but a single brotherhood,2 they hasten to assist one 
another  with  their  prayers  and  spiritual  gains.  We  are  members  of  that  sacred,  vast 
society, and our particular duty is to teach the believers in certain, verified fashion the 
Qur’anic  truths  of  belief,  and  save  them  and  ourselves  from  eternal  extinction  and 
everlasting  solitary  confinement  in  the  Intermediate  Realm.  We  have  absolutely  no 
connection  with  any  worldly,  political,  scheming  society  or  clandestine  group, or the 
covert  organizations  concerning  which  on  no  grounds  whatsover  we  have  been 
charged; we do not condescend to such things. 

* * * 

If  we  had  had  any  desire  to  interfere  in  worldly  affairs,  it  would  not  have  been 
with  such  buzzing  like  a  fly,  it  would  have  exploded  like  the  firing  of  a  cannon.  To 
accuse  someone  who  defended  himself  vehemently  in  the  Military  Court  and  in  the 
office  of  the  Speaker  of  the  National  Assembly  in  the  presence of  an  angry  Mustafa 
Kemal, of hatching plots  

                                             

1 Since the matters were the same, our Master, Üstad Bediuzzaman Said Nursi, presented the 
same defence —skipping where necessary and adding where necessary— to Afyon Court as he had at 
Denizli. He therefore put the greater part of the Denizli defence speeches together with those of 
Afyon, and gave them the name of the Fourteenth Ray.  Signed, His Students. 

2 Qur’an, 49:10. 

 

298

for eighteen years without allowing anyone to be aware of it, is certainly due to some 
grudge or hatred. 

In this  question, the Risale-i Nur should not be attacked because of my personal 
faults  or  those  of  some  of  my  brothers.  It  is  bound  directly  to  the  Qur’an,  and  the 
Qur’an  is  bound  to  the  Sublime  Throne,  so  who  could  dare  to  stretch  out  his  hand 
there and unfasten those strong ropes? 

Moreover,  the  Risale-i  Nur,  whose  blessings  —material  and  spiritual—  for  this 
country,  and  its  exceptional  service,  are  alluded  to  by  thirty-three  of  the  Qur’an’s 
verses,  by  three  predictions  of  Imam  ‘Ali  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him),  and  the 
certain  news  of  Gawth  al-A‘zam  (May  his  mystery  be  sanctified),  may  not  be  held 
responsible  for  our  petty,  personal  faults;  it cannot be and should not be. Irreparable 
harm will otherwise come to this country, both material and spiritual.3  

God  willing,  the  aggression  and  plots  against  the  Risale-i  Nur  of  some  evil-
minded  atheists  will  be  foiled,  for  its  students  cannot  be  compared  with  others;  they 
cannot  be  scattered  or  made  to  give  it  up;  through  God’s  grace,  they  will  not  be 
defeated. They have won the regard of this nation, as though they were vital for it, and 
are  found  everywhere;  even  if  the  Qur’an  had  not  prevented  them  from  physical 
defence,  they  still  would  not  get  involved  in  minor,  fruitless  incidents  like  those  of 
Shaykh Said and Menemen.4 If, God forbid, they were persecuted and the Risale-i Nur 
was  attacked  to  the  extext  they  felt  compelled,  those  atheists  and  dissemblers  who 
hoodwink the Government would certainly come to regret it a thousand times over. 

In  Short:  We  do  not  interfere  in  the  world  of  the  worldly,  so  they  should  not 

interfere in our service of belief and in our lives of the hereafter. 

                                                                                Prisoner   

                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

Sirs! 
I  tell  you  with  certainty  that  apart  from  those  here  who  have  no  connection  or 
little connection with us and the Risale-i Nur, I have as many true brothers and loyal 
friends on the way of truth as you could wish.  

                                             

3 This petition was written twenty days before the Kastamonu earthquake. Through the blessings 

of the Risale-i Nur, Kastamonu was preserved from the disasters more than any other province, but 
now the disasters have begun and have confirmed what we said! 

4 See page 385, footnotes 11, 12. 

 

299

Through  the  certain  discoveries  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  we  know  with  the  unshakeable 
certainty  of  twice  two  equalling  four  that  through  the  mystery  of  the  Qur’an  for  us 
death  has  been  transformed  from  eternal  extinction  into  a discharge from duties, and 
that  for  those  who  oppose  us  and  follow  misguidance  certain  death  is  either  eternal 
annihilation  (if  they  do  not  have  certain  belief  in  the  hereafter),  or  everlasting,  dark 
solitary  confinement  (if  they  believe  in  the  hereafter  and  take  the  way  of  vice  and 
misguidance). Is there a greater or more important question for man in this world than 
this that it can be a tool for it? I ask you! Since there is not and cannot be, why do you 
strive against us? In the face of your greatest penalty, we receive our discharge papers 
to  go  to  the  world  of  light,  so  we  await  it  with complete fortitude. But we know as 
clearly as seeing it, like we see you in this court, that those who reject us and condemn 
us  on  behalf  of  misguidance  will  in  a  very  short  time  be  condemned  to  eternal 
annihilation  and  solitary  confinement  and  will  suffer  that  awesome  punishment,  and 
with our feelings of humanity we earnestly pity them. I am ready to prove this certain 
and important fact and also to silence the most stubborn of them. If I could not prove 
it as clearly as daylight, not to that  unscholarly, prejuiced committee of scholars who 
knew  nothing  of  spiritual  and  moral  matters,  but  to  the  greatest  scholars  and 
philosophers, I should be content with any punishment! 

Just as an example, I offer the treatise The Fruits of Belief, which was written for 
the  prisoners  on  two  Fridays,  and explaining  the  principles  and  bases  of  the  Risale-i 
Nur, is like a defence of it. We are working secretly under great difficulties to have this 
written  out  in  the  new  letters5  so  as  to  give  it  to  the  departments  of  government  in 
Ankara. Read and study it carefully; if your heart (I cannot speak for your soul) does 
not  affirm  me,  I  shall  remain  silent  in  the  face  of  whatever  insults  and  torment  you 
inflict on me in the solitary confinement in which I am now held! 

In  Short:  Either  leave  the  Risale-i  Nur  completely  free,  or  smash  this  powerful 
and irrefutable truth if you can! Up to now, I have not thought of you and your world. 
And  I  was  not  going  to  think  of  it,  but  you  forced  me,  and  perhaps  even  Divine 
Determining sent us on this way in order to warn you. As for us, we resolved to take 
as  our  guide  the  sacred  rule, ‘Whoever believes in Divine Determining is saved from 
grief,’ and to meet all our difficulties with patience. 

                                                                               Prisoner 

                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i 

                                             

5 This refers to the Latin alphabet, which was adopted officially on the passing of a law in 

December 1928. It replaced the Ottoman (Arabic) script, which was thereafter banned. [Tr.] 

 

300

In His Name, be He glorified! 

Saying  that  we  are  “corrupting  religion,”  they  have  censured  us  for  compiling  a 
Hizb al-Qur’ani, like a large An‘am,6 out of hundreds of well-known verses which are 
the particular sources of the  Risale-i Nur, although this is an Islamic custom that has 
been practised since the time of the Prophet. 

They also want to convict us in connection with the Treatise On Islamic Dress, for 
which  I  have  already  served  a  year’s  sentence,  and  which  was  being  treated  as 
confidential,  and  as  recorded  in  the  police  report,  was  pulled  out  from  under  the 
firewood — they want to show that it was written and published this year. Also, I said 
strong  words  to  the  person  (Mustafa  Kemal)  who  was  leader  of  the  Government  in 
Ankara; I criticized him to his face and he did not respond but remained silent; yet the 
natural,  necessary,  and  confidential  criticisms  I  made  of  him  after  his  death  while 
explaining the meaning of a Hadith which indicated his error, were held to be a crime. 
But  what  importance  has  the  sake  of  someone  who  is  dead  and  no  longer  has  any 
connection  with  the  Government  besides  the  sake  of  the nation and  government  and 
the laws of justice, which are a manifestation of Divine sovereignty? 

Moreover,  freedom  of  conscience,  which  is  one  of  the  principles  of  the 
Government of the Republic that we have most relied on and defended ourselves with, 
has  been  made  the  basis  of  charges  against  us; as though we oppose the principle of 
freedom of conscience. 

Another  thing  is  attributed  to  me  in  the  police  report,  which  has  never  ever 
occurred  to  me,  that  since  I  criticize the  evils  and  faults  of  modern  civilization,  I  do 
not accept the use of the radio,7 aeroplanes, and the railway; I am accused of opposing 
modern progress. 

God  willing,  the  fair-minded,  just  Denizli  public  prosecutor  and  court  will  make 
analogies  with  the  above  examples  and  show  how  unjust  are  these  proceedings,  and 
attach no importance to the unfounded suspicions in those reports. 

The most extraordinary of them is this, that the public prosecutor in another trial 

asked me: “You said in the confidential Fifth Ray that the  

                                             
6 See page 389, footnote 13. 
7 I said, to encourage the offering of endless thanks for a supreme Divine bounty like the radio, 
that the Qur’an should be recited on the radio so that people could hear it all over the world, and the 
atmosphere of the globe would become a reciter of the Qur’an. 

 

301

army  would  save  itself  from  the  leadership  of  that  fearsome  person.  Your  intention 
was to incite the army to rebel against the Government.” I replied: “What I meant was 
that the commander would either die or would be transferred, and the army would be 
saved  from  his  domination.”  How  can  a  treatise  that  is  both  extremely  confidential, 
and copies of which have come into my possession only twice in eight years and then 
been  lost,  and  expounds  a  universal  meaning  of  a  Hadith  about  the  end  of  time,  and 
was originally written long ago, and moreover one single soldier has not seen — how 
can such a treatise be the reason for such charges?  

The  strangest  of  all  was  this,  that  I  said  in  one  place  that  Almighty  God’s  great 
bounties  of  the  aeroplane,  railway,  and  radio  should  be  responded  to  with  great 
thanks,  yet  mankind  had  not  done  this  and  had  rained  down  bombs  on  men’s  heads 
with  the  planes.  While  thanks  for  the  vast  bounty  of  the  radio  would  be  shown  by 
making it a universal million-tongued reciter of the Qur’an which would allow people 
all  over  the  earth  to  listen  to  the  Qur’an.  And  in  the  explanations  in  the  Twentieth 
Word of Qur’anic predictions about the wonders of civilization, I said concerning the 
allusions of one verse that the unbelievers would defeat the Islamic world by means of 
the railway. Although I urged Muslims to work towards these wonders, I am accused 
at  the  end  of  the  indictment  because  of  the  previous  public  prosecutor’s  malice,  of 
“opposing modern advances like the railway, aeroplane, and radio.” 

Also, although it has absolutely no connection, someone had said about the name 
Risaletü’n-Nur,  which  is  another  name  for  the  Risale-i  Nur,  that  “it  is  ‘a  message’ 
(risalet)  inspired  from  the light of the Qur’an;” and attaching a wrong meaning from 
another place in the indictment, they made it into another charge, as though I had said 
“the Risale-i Nur is a Divine Messenger.” 

Also, I have proved decisively in twenty places in my defence that we would not 
make religion, the Qur’an, and the Risale-i Nur tools of anything, even in the face of 
the  whole  world,  and  we  could  not,  and  that  we  would  not  change  a  single  of  their 
truths  for  all  the  world,  and  that  is  how  we  are  in  fact.  Over  these last twenty years 
there  are  thousands  of  evidences  of  this.  Since  it  is  thus,  we  declare  with  all  our 
strength: 

                              For us God suffices and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs.8 

                                   S a i d  N u r s i 

                                             

8 Qur’an, 3:173. 

 

302

In His Name, be He glorified! 

A Supplement to My Objections to the Indictment 

[Those  addressed  by  these  objections  are  not  Denizli  Court  and  the  public 
prosecutor,  but  the  malicious,  suspicious  officials,  chiefly  the  Isparta  and 
Inebolu  prosecutors,  who  with  their  false  and  inaccurate  records,  were  the 
cause of the extraordinary indictment against us here.] 

F  i  r  s  t  l  y  :  The  Risale-i  Nur  students,  who  are  innocent  and  not  in  any  way 
involved  in  politics,  have  unimaginably  and  on  no  grounds  whatsoever  been  called  a 
political  society,  and  the  unfortunates  who  have  joined  that  circle  and  have  no  aim 
other than belief and the hereafter, have been considered guilty of being disseminators 
of  that  society,  or  active  officers  or members  of it, or of reading the Risale-i Nur or 
teaching it or writing it out, and have been sent to trial. A certain proof of how far this 
is from the essence of justice is that although according to the principles of freedom of 
thought and freedom of study it is not considered a crime to read the harmful works of 
Doctor Dozy9 and other atheists hostile to Islam, it is counted a crime for those people 
needy  for  the  truths  of  the  Qur’an  and  belief  to  read and write out the Risale-i Nur, 
which  teaches  those  truths  as  brilliantly  as  the  sun.  In addition, only a few sentences 
from two or three treatises out of hundreds, which we had held to be confidential so 
that  no  wrong  meaning  be  ascribed  to  them  and  had  not  permitted  to  be  published, 
were  made  the  pretext  for  our  indictment.  Whereas  with  one  exception,  Eskişehir 
Court  had  scrutinized  those  treatises,  seen  what  they  necessitated.  As  for  the 
exception,  I  gave  an  extremely  decisive  answer  to  it  in  both  my  petition,  and  my 
objections  to  Eskişehir  Court,  and  it  was  proved  in  twenty  respects  that  “we  have 
light, not the club of politics.” Nevertheless, those unfair prosecutors inferred that the 
three  or  four  sentences  in  three  confidential  and  unpublished  treatises  could  be 
extended to the whole Risale-i Nur, and accused myself and those who read and write 
the Risale-i Nur of contesting the government. 

I call to witness my close friends and those who meet with me, and I swear that 
apart  from  two  Presidents,  one  deputy,  and  the  Governor  of  Kastamonu,  for  more 
than ten years, I have not known who the members and ministers of the Government 
are, or its leaders, officials and deputies, and I have not had the slightest curiosity to 
find out. Is it at all possible  

                                             

9 Reinhart Dozy (1820-1883), the Dutch orientalist one of whose works was the inaccurate and 

derogatory Essaie sur l’Histoire de l’Islamisme, which was translated into Turkish by the atheist 
Abdullah Cevdet and published under the title Târîh-i Islâmiyet (Cairo 1908). [Tr.] 

 

303

for a person not to know the people he is contesting and not to be curious about them, 
for  him not to know if they are friend or foe, and to attach no importance to finding 
out?  It  is  clearly  understood  from  this  that  they  are  concocting  completely  baseless 
pretexts to convict me whatever happens. 

Since  that  is  how  it  is,  I  say  not  to  the  court  here,  but to those unjust people: I 
don’t  give  tuppence  for  the  severest  penalty  you  can  inflict  on  me;  it  has  no 
importance.  For I am seventy years old and at the door of the grave. It is great good 
fortune for me to exchange one or two years of persecuted, innocent life for the rank 
of  martyrdom.  Through  the  thousands  of  proofs  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  I  believe 
absolutely  certainly  that  for  us  death  consists  of  discharge  papers.  If  we  are  to  be 
executed,  one  hour’s  distress  would  be  the  key  to  eternal  happiness  and  mercy.  But 
you unjust people who confuse the judiciary on account of atheism and preoccupy the 
Government  with  us  for  no  reason!  Know  certainly  that  you  will  be  condemned  to 
eternal annihilation and everlasting solitary confinement, and tremble! I see you will be 
made  to  pay  for  it  many  times  over.  I  pity you  even.  Yes,  death,  which  has emptied 
this  city  a  hundred  times  into  the  graveyard,  certainly  has  greater  demands  than  life. 
And the question of people being saved from being executed by it is the most pressing 
and most important they face and their most essential and certain need. Even lunatics, 
therefore, would understand that in the eyes of reality and justice those who accuse on 
petty pretexts the Risale-i Nur students, who have found this solution for themselves, 
and the Risale-i Nur, which provides it supported by thousands of proofs, themselves 
become the object of accusation. 

There  are  three  matters  which  deceive  these  unjust  people,  leading  them  to 
suspect  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  are  a  political  society,  with  which  they  have 
absolutely no connection: 

The  First: Ever since early days, my students  have been passionately attached to 

me, like brothers, and this has given rise to suspicions of a political society. 

The Second: Some of the Risale-i Nur students have acted like the groups within 
the Islamic community, the same as everywhere and as is permitted by the laws of the 
Republic, and this has been supposed to be a society. But the intention of those three 
or  four  students  was  not  some  sort  of  political  society,  it  was  purely  sincere 
brotherhood in the service of belief and a solidarity which looks to the hereafter. 

The Third: Since those unjust people know themselves to be misguided and lovers 
of the life of this world, and since they find some of the laws of the land convenient for 
themselves, they say to themselves: “Doubtless, Said and his friends are opposed to us 
and to the laws of the  

 

304

Government  which  are  favourable  to  our  ‘civilized’  illicit  passions.  They  must 
therefore have a political society which is antagonistic to us.” So I say to them: 

You unfortunates! If the world had been eternal and man was going to remain in it 
for  ever, and if  man’s duties had consisted only of politics, there might possibly have 
been  some  meaning  in  these  slanders of yours. And if I had embarked on this matter 
for political ends, you would have found not ten sentences in a hundred treatises, but a 
thousand,  to  be  combative  and  connected  with  politics.  And  if  to  suppose  the 
impossible, like you we were working with all our strength for worldly aims, pleasures, 
and politics —which even Satan could not make anyone believe and accept— even if it 
was  thus,  since  there  is  nothing  these  twenty  years  to  suggest  this,  and  the 
Government  looks  to  the  hand  and  not  the  heart,  and  all  governments  have  fierce 
opponents; then still there is nothing with which we can be charged according the laws 
of justice. My final word is: 

God suffices me, there is no god but He; in Him do I place my trust  — He 
the Sustainer of the Throne [of Glory] Supreme!10 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

[I  quote  exactly  an old  memory  and subtle matter  of defence which was not 
disclosed  in  Eskişehir  Court,  and  not  officially  recorded,  and  was  not  even 
written in my defence.] 

They  asked  me  there:  “What  do  you  think  about  the  Republic?”  I  replied:  “My 
biography, which you have in your possession, proves that I was a religious republican 
before any of you, with the exception perhaps of the Chairman of Eskişehir Court, was 
born.  A  summary  of  it  is  this:  like  now,  at  that  time  I  was  living  in  seclusion  in  an 
uninhabited tomb. Someone would bring me soup  and I used to give breadcrumbs to 
the ants. I used to eat my bread with the soup.  Some people heard  of this and asked 
me about it, and I told them: “The ant and bee nations are republicans; I give the ants 
the breadcrumbs out of respect for their republicanism.” 

So  they  said:  “You  are  opposing  the  early  leaders  of  Islam.”  I  replied:  “The 
Rightly-Guided  Caliphs  were  both  Caliph  and  presidents  of  the  republic.  Surely  Abu 
Bakr the Veracious  (May God be pleased with him), the Ten Promised Paradise, and 
the Companions of the Prophet were like  

                                             

10 Qur’an, 9:129. 

 

305

presidents of the republic. But it was not some meaningless title; they were leaders of a 
religious  republic  the  meaning  of  which  was  true  justice  and  the  freedom  of  the 
Shari‘a.” 

Mr.  Prosecutor  and  Members  of  the  Court!  You  are  accusing  me  of  holding  an 
idea  the  opposite  of  which  I  have  held  for  fifty  years.  If  you  are  asking  about  the 
secular republic, what I understand by it is that secularism means being unbiased; that 
is, in accordance with the principle of freedom of conscience, it refers to a government 
that  does  not  interfere  with  religiously-minded  and  pious people, the same as it does 
not  interfere  with  the  irreligious  and  dissolute.  I  have  withdrawn  from  political  and 
social  life  for  ten,  and  now  its  twenty,  years.  I  do  not  know  the  state  of  the 
Government of the Republic. If, God forbid, it has taken on a fearsome form whereby, 
on account of irreligion, it promulgates laws indicting those who work for their belief 
and  lives  in  the  hereafter,  I  proclaim  to  you  fearlessly  and  warn  you:  if  I  had  a 
thousand lives, I would be ready to sacrifice all of them for belief and the hereafter. Do 
whatever you like, my last word is For us God suffices and He is the Best Disposer of 
Affairs.  In  the  face  of  your  sentencing  me  unjustly  to  capital  punishment  or  life 
imprisonment I say: as the Risale-i Nur has discovered and proved certainly, I am not 
being  executed  but  discharged  from  my  duties;  I  am  going  to  the  world  of  light  and 
abode  of  bliss.  As  for  you,  you  unfortunates  who  persecute  us  on  behalf  of 
misguidance!  Since  I  know  that  you  are  being  sentenced  to  eternal  annihilation  and 
everlasting solitary confinement, I am prepared to surrender up my spirit with perfect 
ease of mind, having taken my revenge on you completely. 

                                                                                              Prisoner 

                                                                                        S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

Sirs! 
I have formed the certain opinion as a result of numerous indications that we have 
been  attacked  not  for  ‘breaching  public  security  by  exploiting  religious  feelings’  on 
behalf of the Government, but behind a tissue of lies, on behalf of atheism, because of 
our belief and our service to belief and public order. One proof of this out of many is 
that despite twenty thousand people reading and accepting the twenty thousand copies 
of  the  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  over  twenty  years,  public  security  has  not  been 
breached by students of the Risale-i Nur on any occasion whatsover, and  

 

306

no such incident has been recorded by the Government, and neither the former nor the 
present  courts  have  found  such  a  incident.  Whereas,  had  there  been  any  such 
widespread, powerful propaganda, it would have become apparent within twenty days. 
That is to say, contrary to the principle of freedom of conscience, Article 163 of this 
ambiguous  law,11  which  embraces  all  who  give  religious  counsel,  is  a  bogus  mask. 
Atheists deceive certain members of the Government, confuse the legal establishment, 
and want to crush us whatever happens.  

Since the reality of the matter is this, we say with all our strength: o wretches who 
sell religion for the world and have fallen into absolute unbelief! Do whatever you can! 
Your  world  will  be  the  end  of  you!  Let  our  heads  also  be  sacrificed  for  a  truth  that 
hundreds  of  millions  of  heads have been sacrificed for! We are ready for any penalty 
and for our execution! In this situation, being outside prison is a hundred times worse 
than  being  inside  it.  Since  there is no freedom at all —neither religious freedom, nor 
freedom  of  conscience,  nor  scholarly  freedom—  under  the  absolute  despotism  that 
confronts us, for those with honour, the people of religion and supporters of freedom, 
there  is  no  solution  apart  from  death  or  entering  prison.  We  say,  To  God  do  we 
belong, and to Him is our return,12 and we trust in our Sustainer. 

                                                                                     Prisoner 

                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

Chairman of the Court, Ali Riza Bey! 
I have an important request in order to defend my rights: I do not know the new 
letters, and my handwriting in the old  is very inadequate. Also, they do not allow me 
to  meet  with  anyone;  I  am  kept  in  what  is  quite  simply  solitary  confinement.  The 
indictment was even taken off me after fifteen minutes. I also do not have the means to 
employ  a  lawyer.  I  was  able  to  obtain  only  one  copy  of  part  of  the  defence  I  have 
presented to you, in the new letters, secretly.  I also had written out one or two copies 
of The Fruits of Belief, which is a sort of defence of the Risale-i Nur and a summary 
of  its  way,  to  give  to  the  public  prosecutor  and  to  send  to  the  departments  of 
government in Ankara. They suddenly took them off  

                                             

11 Article 163 of the Criminal Code: a law designed to enforce the principle of ‘secularism,’ and 

prevent the growth of any religious movements. [Tr.] 

12 Qur’an, 2:156. 

 

307

me  and  have  not  returned  them.  Whereas  the  judicial  authorities  in  Eskişehir  sent  a 
typewriter to the prison for us. We wrote out one or two copies of our defences on it 
in the new letters, and the Court wrote them out as well. My urgent request, therefore, 
is either you supply us with a typewriter, or allow us to procure one outside so that we 
can  type  out  in  the  new  letters  two  or  three  copies  of  both  our  defences,  and  the 
treatise which is a sort of defence of the Risale-i Nur. We shall then send them to both 
the  Ministry of Justice, and the Cabinet, and the National Assembly, and the Council 
of State. For it is the Risale-i Nur that is the basis of the indictment, and the charges 
against the Risale-i Nur and the objections to it are not some petty, personal matter so 
that no importance should be attached to them. On the contrary, it is a general matter 
of serious concern to the nation, country, and Government, and will therefore arouse 
significant attention in the Islamic world. 

Yes, those who covertly attack the Risale-i Nur are those who in order to destroy 
the regard, love, and brotherhood of the Islamic world, which is the greatest strength 
of  this  country’s  people,  and  arouse  loathing,  are  covertly  establishing  absolute 
disbelief by making politics the tool of irreligion. They have deceived the Government 
and twice confused the legal establishment, saying: “The Risale-i Nur and its students 
exploit religion for politics and there is the possibility of their disturbing public order 
and security. 

You unfortunates! The Risale-i Nur definitely has no connection with politics, but 
since  it  has  smashed  absolute  disbelief,  it  destroys  and  repulses  anarchy,  which 
underlies  absolute  disbelief,  and  absolute  despotism,  which  overlies  it.  One  of  the 
hundreds  of  proofs  that  it  ensures  public  order,  security,  freedom,  and  justice  is  The 
Fruits of Belief (Meyve Risalesi), which is like its defence. It should be scrutinized by 
a committee of prominent scholars and sociologists; if they do not confirm what I say, 
I consent to any punishment or tortuous execution! 

                                                                                    Prisoner 

                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

Chairman of the Court! 
Three matters have been made the basis of the Indictment: 
The First is a political society. I cite as witnesses all the Risale-i Nur students here 
and those who have met with me, and those who read or write out the Risale-i Nur; 
you may ask them. I have not said to anyone  

 

308

that we were going to set up a political society or a Naqshbandi association. I always 
told them that we were going to work to save belief. No society has been mentioned 
among us apart from the sacred community of Islam, which includes all believers and 
has  more  than  three  hundred  million  members.  Through  the  brotherhood  of  all 
believers and because of our service of the Qur’an, we found ourselves in the ‘Party of 
the Qur’an’ (Hizb al-Qur’an), which in the Qur’an is called the  Hizb Allah. If this is 
what is meant in the Indictment, we admit to it wholeheartedly and with pride. But if 
something else is meant, we know nothing of it! 

The Second Matter: As is stated in the Indictment and confirmed by the report of 
the  Kastamonu  police,  some  books  like  the  Treatise  On  Islamic  Dress  (Tesettür 
Risalesi)  and  The  Six  Attacks  (Hücumat-i  Sitte)  and  its  addendum,  were  found  in 
nailed  boxes  under  piles  of  firewood  and  coal  in  a  condition  that  would  in  no  way 
allow  them  to  be  published.  They  had  been  scrutinized  and  criticized  by  Eskişehir 
Court,  a  light  sentence  had  been  served  for  them,  and  they  had  most  certainly  been 
treated as private. Now, reading false meanings into some of their sentences, it wants 
to take us back nine years and charge us again with a crime the penalty of which we 
have already served. 

The  Third  Matter:  In  several  places  in  the  Indictment,  phrases  have  been  used 
which  express  possibility  rather  than  actual  occurrences,  like  “he  may  breach  state 
security or he may harm it.” It is possible for everyone to commit murder, but are they 
to be charged with it due to the possibility? 

                                                                                         Prisoner 

                                                                                  S a i d  Nu r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

Chairman of the Court! 
I present my defence, which is in the form of a petition I sent to the departments 
of government in Ankara and to the President, and the reply from the Prime Minister’s 
Office, which shows that they recognized its importance. Contained in this defence are 
decisive answers to the unfounded and offensive suspicions that the prosecution have 
stated  against  us.  There  are  numerous  untrue  and  illogical things in the report of the 
committee  of  experts  from  here,  which  was  based  on  the  superficial  and  malicious 
reports of other places; my objections to these too have been presented. 

 

309

In Short: As I stated before, I told Eskişehir Court when they wanted to convict 
me under Article 163: out of two hundred deputies of the Republican Government, the 
same  number,  163,  agreed  to  assign  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  liras  to  my 
medrese13  in  Van.  Due  to  this,  the  regard  in  which  the  Republican  Government  held 
me invalidates Article 163 as far as I am concerned. Although I told the court this, the 
committee  of  experts  corrupted  what  I  said  and  wrote:  “163  deputies  opened 
proceedings against Said.” It is because of this totally baseless accusation of that first 
experts’ committee that the prosecution is making charges against us. This is in spite 
of  the  fact  that  the  Risale-i  Nur  had  been  referred,  on  your  decision,  to  the  highest 
learned  and  scientific  committee,  and  having  studied  and  scrutinized  all  its  parts,  the 
committee  unanimously  made  this  statement  about  us:  “There  is  nothing  explicit  or 
inferred in the writings of Said and the Risale-i Nur students which suggests that they 
have any intent to exploit religion or sacred matters, encourage the breaching of state 
security, or found a political society, or conspire in any way against the Government. 
It is understood that in their correspondences, Said’s students did not nurture any evil 
intentions against the Government, or have the idea of founding a political association, 
or establishing a sufi order.” 

The  second  committee  of  experts  also  stated  unanimously  that  “ninety-nine  per 
cent  of  Said  Nursi’s  treatises  are both sincere, and disinterested, and have in no way 
departed  from  the  principles  of  scholarship,  reality,  and  religion.  There  is  clearly 
nothing in them exploiting religion, or concerning the formation of a political society, 
or  breaching  security.  The  letters  and  correspondence  between  the  students  and 
between  them  and  Said  Nursi  are  of  this  sort.  Apart  from  five  or  ten  confidential, 
complaining,  and  unscholarly pieces,  all  the  treatises  expound  Qur’anic  verses  or the 
true  meanings  of  Hadiths.  Ninety  per  cent  of  the  available  treatises  contain 
comparisons  illustrating  clearly  the  tenets  of  belief  in  God,  the  Prophet,  and  the 
hereafter and their terminology, scholarly views, moral admonitions to the elderly and 
to youths, and instructive incidents selected from his experiences in life. They contain 
nothing which could damage the Government, administration, or public security. 

Thus,  the  prosecution  ignored  the  report  of  this  eminent  committee  and  made 
extraordinary  charges  against  us  based  on  the  confused,  deficient  first  report,  so  we 
are  truly  extremely  upset.  We  in  no  way  deem  it  fitting  for  this  just  court  with  its 
proven fairness. If there be no mistake in the comparison, it resembles this story: they 
asked a Bektashi why he did not perform the obligatory prayers. He told them: “It says 
in the Qur’an  

                                             
13 See, page 483, footnote 69. 

 

310

‘Approach not the prayers.’” When they reminded him that the verse continued “When 
you are intoxicated,”14 he told them: “I have not memorized the whole Qur’an.” They 
take a single sentence from the Risale-i Nur, and disregarding what follows it, which 
puts it in context and explains it, use it against us. Thirty to forty examples of this are 
to be seen in the defence I shall present, when comparing it with the indictment. I shall 
recount a subtle incident which is one of those examples: 

The  prosecution  in  Eskişehir  Court  used  a  phrase  about  the  Risale-i  Nur’s 
instruction  in  belief  which  was  anyway  the  result  of  an  error,  like  “it  corrupts  the 
people.”  Although  it  later  did  not  use  it,  one  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  called 
Abdürrezzaq, said a year after the trial: 

“You unfortunate! The Risale-i Nur has received the indirect praise of thirty-three 
Qur’anic  verses,  its  value  for  religion  has  been  established  by  three  miraculous 
predictions of Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) and the powerful allusions of 
Gawth al-A‘zam (May his mystery be sanctified); these twenty years it has caused the 
Government  no  trouble  whatsoever,  and  besides  not  harming  anyone  at  all,  has 
illumined and guided thousands of the sons of this land,  and  strengthened their belief 
and rectified their conduct, and yet  you call that guidance ‘corruption.’ You have no 
fear of God! May your tongue be cursed!” 

Now,  the  prosecution  has  seen  these  words  of  that  student,  so  I  refer  to  your 

fairness and conscience the expression: “Said has spread corruption.” 

With  the  idea  of  interfering  in  the  social  teachings  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  the 
prosecution said: “The place of religion is the conscience; it cannot be tied to laws and 
regulations.  Formerly  there  was  social  unrest  because  it  was  tied  to  laws.”  So  I  say: 
“Religion does not consist only of belief; its second half is righteous action. Is fear of 
imprisonment  or  being  seen  by  a  government  detective  sufficient  to  deter  those  who 
commit  numerous  grievous  sins  which  poison  society,  like  murder,  adultery,  theft, 
gambling,  and  drinking?  If  that  was  so,  there  would  have  to  be  a  policeman  or 
detective  stationed  permanently  in  every  house,  or  at  everyone’s  side  even,  so  that 
obdurate souls would restrain themselves from those filthy acts. Whereas, in respect of 
good  deeds  and  belief,  the  Risale-i  Nur  places  a  permanent  immaterial  ‘prohibitor’ 
next  to  everyone.  It  easily saves them from bad deeds by recalling the prison of Hell 
and Divine wrath. 

Also,  due  to  the  signature  in  one  treatise  of  a  wonderful  and  extra-ordinary 
‘coincidence,’ the prosecution made a meaningless inference, saying “the members of a 
political society.” Are the holders of signatures  

                                             

14 Qur’an, 4:43. 

 

311

of this sort in the account books of tradesmen and innkeepers called a society. There 
was  a  similar  baseless  accusation  in  Eskişehir  Court.  When I replied and showed the 
treatise called The Miracles of Muhammad (PBUH), they were astonished. If we had 
formed a worldly society, those who had suffered so much harm on my account would 
certainly have fled from me in total abhorrence. This means that just as I and we have 
a  relationship  with  Imam  Ghazali  which  is  not  broken  off  because  it  pertains  to  the 
hereafter  not  to  this  world;  so  these  innocent,  sincere,  pure  religious  people  have 
displayed  a  powerful  attachment  to  an  unfortunate  like  myself  for  the  sake  of  his 
teachings  about  belief.  This  has  given  rise  to  unfounded  suspicions  of  an  imaginary 
political society. My last word is:  

For us God suffices and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs. 

                                                                         Prisoner in solitary confinement 

                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

[This piece is very important] 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

An Important Part of My Final Word 

Sirs! Chairman of the Court! Take note!  
Since  to  convict  the  Risale-i Nur and its students is the equivalent of convicting 
the  truths  of  the  Qur’an  and  belief,  it  is  to  try  to  close  —directly  on  account  of 
absolute  disbelief—  the  highway  taken  every  year  for  one  thousand  three  hundred 
years  by  three  hundred  million  Muslims,  leading  to  reality  and  the  happiness  of  both 
worlds, and it will attract towards yourself their revulsion and objections. For those on 
the highway assist with their prayers and good works those who have already passed 
down  it.  It  will  also  be  a  means  to  a  doomsday  breaking  forth  over  this  blessed 
country. What answer will you give at the Last Judgement when you are asked in the 
face of those three hundred thousand million claimants: “You did not interfere with the 
French  work  by  Doctor  Dozy  called  Tarih-i  Islam,  which  from  beginning  to  end 
attacks  Islam,  your  country  and  your religion, nor with the works of atheists in your 
libraries  and  their  free  availability,  nor  with  the  students  of  those  books who formed 
themselves into illegal societies, nor with the societies who opposed your politics like 
the communists, anarchists, the old revolutionary societies, or the negative Turkists; so 
why have you interfered with  

 

312

the readers of a work of truth and reality like the Risale-i Nur, a true commentary on 
the  Qur’an,  and  its  students,  who  have  no  connection  with  politics  whatsoever  and 
have  taken  the  highway  of  the  Qur’an  and  belief  solely  to  save  themselves  and  their 
fellow-countrymen from eternal annihilation and solitary confinement? And why have 
you  called  the  friendship  and  brotherhood  of  those  sincerely  religious  people  which 
looks  only  to  the  hereafter,  a  political  society?  You  have  convicted  them  under  a 
bizarre law, and that is what you wanted.” We ask you the same thing. Our enemies, 
the  atheists  and  dissemblers,  deceive  you,  confuse  the  judiciary,  and  busy  the 
Government  with  us  in  a  way  detrimental  to  the  country  and  people;  by  calling 
absolute despotism “the Republic,” and making  absolute apostasy part of the regime, 
and  calling  absolute  vice  “civilization,”  and  attaching  the  name  of  “the  law”  to 
arbitrary  force  and  compulsion  on  account  of  disbelief,  they  both  preoccupy  the 
Government,  and  have  scattered  us,  thus  dealing  blows  on  account  of  Europeans  at 
the supremacy of Islam and the country and people. 

Sirs!  As  is  indicated  by  the  four  severe  earthquakes  in  four  years  coinciding 
exactly  with  the  severe  aggression  against  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  and  their  being 
persecuted, and on each occasion their occurring exactly at the time the students were 
attacked  and  their  stopping  when  the  attacks  ceased,  you  are  responsible  for  the 
heavenly and earthly disasters that have occurred on our being convicted...! 

                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i 

                                                       who is being held in total isolation 
                                                  and solitary confinement in Denizli Prison 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

Another Part of My Final Word 

Sirs! 
The Ankara committee of experts has confirmed our decisive reply to the charge 
of  forming  a  political  association  insistently  put  forward  by  you  as  a  pretext  for  our 
conviction, which you have decided upon as may be deduced from the course followed 
by the prosecution. While being amazed and astonished at your insisting on this point 
to  this  degree,  this  meaning  occurred  to  me:  since  friendship,  fraternal  communities 
and  assemblies,  and  sincere  associations  pertaining  to  the  hereafter  and  brotherhood 
are each both foundation stones of social life, and an essential  

 

313

need of  human  nature,  and  a most  necessary  bond of great strength between people, 
from the life of the family to that of tribe, nation, Islam, and humanity, and a point of 
support  and  means  of  consolation  in  the  face  of  the  assaults  of  the  material  and 
immaterial  things  which  cause  harm  and  alarm  and  which  each  person  encounters  in 
the  universe  and  cannot  combat  on  his  own,  and  which  prevent  him  carrying  out his 
human  and  Islamic  duties;  and  since  there  are  some  who  give  the  name  of  ‘political 
society,’ although it has no political front, to the gathering together of the students of 
the  Risale-i  Nur  around  the  teachings  of  belief,  which  is  most  praiseworthy  and  is 
sincere friendship centred on the teachings of belief and the Qur’an and certainly leads 
to happiness in this world and in religion and in the hereafter, and is a companionship 
on the way of truth, and co-operation; most certainly and without any doubt, they have 
either  been  deceived  in  some  appalling  manner,  or  they  are  extremely  vicious 
anarchists  who  are  both  barbarously  inimical  to  humanity,  and  tyrannically  hostile  to 
Islam, and harbour enmity towards society in the utterly corrupt and depraved manner 
of anarchy, and strive obdurately and intractably as apostates against this country and 
nation,  the  sovereignty  of  Islam  and  sacred  things  of  religion,  or  they  are  satanic 
atheists who, working on behalf of foreigners to cut and destroy the life-giving arteries 
of this nation, are deceiving the Government and confusing the legal establishment in 
order to destroy or turn against our brothers and our country the immaterial weapons 
which up to now we have used against them — those satans, pharaohs, and anarchists. 

                                                                                       Prisoner 

                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

Sirs! 
With your permission I shall address a few words, in your presence and apparently 
to you, but in fact to the secret revolutionary committee bent on corruption, which has 
taken  on  many  forms,  and  with  the  idea  of  depraving  this  nation  in  the  name  of 
disbelief  and  atheism  and  on  account  of  foreigners,  has  for  thirty  or  forty  years 
employed every means to attack the Qur’an and truths of belief; and to the inhuman, 
thoughtless officials whom they have made a screen to themselves in this matter; and 
their propagandists in the guise of Muslims who have confused this court. 

(The decision to acquit us on the second day made this fiery speech superfluous.) 

                                                                       S a i d  N u r s i , 

                                                      in total isolation and solitary confinement 

 

314

The Correct Answer to an Important Question 

Several  high-ranking  officials  asked  me:  “Why  did  you  not  accept  Mustafa 
Kemal’s  offer  of  a  three-hundred-lira  salary  and  the  post  of  general  preacher  in 
Kurdistan and the Eastern Provinces in place of Shaykh Sanusi?15 If you had accepted 
it,  you  would  have  been  instrumental  in  saving  the  lives  of  the  hundred  thousand 
people who were slaughtered because of the revolution.” 

I  told  them  in  reply:  the  Risale-i  Nur,  which  has  been  the  means  of  gaining  for 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  our  fellow-countrymen  millions  of  years  of  life  in  the 
hereafter, has performed that task a thousand times over, in place of twenty or thirty 
years of worldly life I was unable to save for those people. If I had accepted the offer, 
the Risale-i Nur,  which can be the tool of nothing nor follow anything and holds the 
mystery  of  sincerity,  would  not  have  come  into  being.  I  even  told  my  respected 
brothers  in  prison:  if  those  who  have  condemned  me  to  be  executed  because  of  the 
heavy blows of the Risale-i Nur, which was sent to Ankara, save their belief through 
the  Risale-i  Nur  and  are  delivered  from  eternal  annihilation,  you  bear  witness  that  I 
forgive them with all my life and soul! 

I  told  those  who  were  pestering  me  with  their  surveillance  in  Denizli  after  our 
acquittal,  and  the  high-ranking  officials  and  police  chief  and  inspectors:  It  is  an 
undeniable  wonder  of  the  Risale-i  Nur that in nine months of close investigations no 
document has been found or connection of any kind with any movement, association, 
or  society  here  or  abroad,  in  the  twenty  years  of  my  life  of  oppression,  or  in  the 
hundreds  of  my  treatises and  letters,  or  among  my thousands of students. Could this 
extraordinary situation have been achieved by the power of thought or through some 
arrangement? If the private concerns of one person over a number of years are brought 
to light, there certainly would be twenty matters to embarass or convict him. Since the 
fact is this, you will say either that some brilliant undefeatable genius is organizing the 
matter, or that it is a truly munificent Divine preservation. It would surely be an error 
to contest such a genius. It would cause great harm to the country and people. While 
to  oppose  such  Divine  preservation  and  dominical  grace  would  be  pharaoh-like 
obduracy. 

If you  say: “If we release you and do not keep you under surveillance, you may 

contaminate the life of our society with your teachings and obstruse mysteries.” 

                                             
15 See page 381-2, footnote 9. 

 

315

I  reply:  All  my  teachings  without  exception  have  been  seen  by  the  Government 
and  judicial  authorities,  and  no  matter  has  been  found  requiring  even  one  day’s 
penalty. Forty to fifty thousand copies of those teachings have been passed from hand 
to  hand,  being  studied  attentively  and  with  curiosity,  yet  the  readers  have  only 
benefited,  no  one  has  suffered  any  harm.  Also,  since  both  the  former  court  and  the 
present court could find no indictable offences, it is an ugly and meaningless injustice 
for you to interfere with our acquittal granted unanimously by the new court, and with 
me and the Risale-i Nur, as is proved decisively by the former court only being able to 
give  sentences  of  six  months  each  to  fifteen  out  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  of  my 
brothers  who  were  being  held in prison, only arbitrarily and on the pretext of five or 
ten  words  out  of  one  hundred  and  thirty  treatises,  for  the  sake  of  an  important 
personage  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.  Moreover,  I  have no new teachings and none of 
my  secrets  have  remained  hidden  so  that  you  should  try  to  modify  them  through 
supervision. 

I  am  now  very  much  in  need  of  my  freedom.  Enough  now  of  the  unnecessary, 
unjust,  and  meaningless  surveillance  to  which  I  have  been  subjected  these  twenty 
years. My patience is exhausted. There is the possibility that due to old age I shall utter 
the curses that up to now I have refrained from uttering. “The sighs of the oppressed 
rise to the Divine Throne” is a powerful truth. 

Then  those tyrannical wretches who occupy high places in the eyes of the world 
said: “Not once in twenty years have you worn our headgear; you have not uncovered 
your  head  in  the  presence  of  either  the  former  court  or  the  present courts; you have 
presented  yourself  in  the  former  attire.  Whereas  seventeen  million  have  taken  to 
modern dress.” So I replied: rather than wearing through a dispensation of the Shari‘a 
and under the constraint of the law, the dress, not of seventeen million or even seven 
million,  but  with  their  own  consent  and  sincere  acceptance  of  seven  thousand 
European-smitten drunkards, I prefer to wear, in conformity with the Shari‘a and fear 
of  God,  the  dress  of  seven  thousand  million.  It  may  not  be  said  of  someone  like  me 
who for twenty-five years has withdrawn from social life “he obstinately opposes us.” 
Even if it was obstinacy, since Mustafa Kemal could not break it, and two courts could 
not break it, and the authorities of three provinces could not smash it, who are you to 
struggle  pointlessly  to  break  that  obstinacy  to  the  harm  of  both  the  nation  and  the 
Government! Even if he was a political opponent, since as you have confirmed, he has 
severed  all  his  connections  with  the  world  these  last  twenty  years  and  has  in  effect 
been  dead,  he  would  not  be  again  raised  to  life,  meaninglessly  become  involved  in 
political life causing himself considerable harm, and struggle against you; it is therefore 
lunacy  

 

316

to  have  groundless  fears  about  his  opposing  you.  Since  it  is  a  lunacy  to  even  speak 
seriously with lunatics, I am giving up speaking with those like you. I said: “Whatever 
you  do,  I  won’t  feel  obliged  to  you!”,  which  both  angered  them,  and  silenced  them. 
My final word is: 

For  us  God  suffices,  and  He  is  the  Best  of  Disposer  of  Affairs.16  *  God 
suffices  me,  there  is  no  god  but  He;  in  Him  do  I  place  my  trust  —  He  the 
Sustainer of the Throne [of Glory] Supreme!17 

* * * 

What I Said This Time in My Short Defence 

The  compasssion,  reality,  and  truth  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  prevents  us  from 
involvement in politics. For innocents are afflicted with calamities and we would have 
been  unjust  towards  to  them.  Some  people  wanted  an  explanation  of this, and I told 
them: 

In  the  present  stormy  century,  the  egotism  and  racialism  proceeding  from  cruel 
civilization,  and  the  military  dictatorships  resulting  from  the  Great  War,  and  the 
pitilessness  arising from misguidance have led to such extreme tyranny and excessive 
despotisms  that  if  the  people  of  truth  defend  their  rights  through  physical  force,  or 
through  severe  tyranny,  numerous  unfortunates  will  be  burnt  on  the  pretext  of 
partisanship,  and  in  that  situation,  they  too  will  be  excessively  tyrannical  and  will  be 
defeated.  For  those  who  act  and  attack  out  of  the  above  feelings,  on  some  petty 
pretext,  strike  at  twenty  to  thirty  people  because  of  the  mistakes of one  or two, and 
destroy them. If on the way of truth and justice, the people of truth strike only at the 
one  who  struck,  they  win  only  one  in  the  face  of  thirty  losses,  and  are  then  in  a 
position  of  defeat.  If,  in  accordance  with  the  unjust  rule  of  responding  in  kind,  the 
people of truth also crush twenty to thirty people due to the errors of one or two, they 
will then perpetrate a ghastly injustice in the name of right. 

This  then  is  the  true  reason  for  our  having  strenuously  avoided  politics  and 
interfering in government, and for our aversion towards it. For the power of truth we 
have  at  our  disposal  is  such  that  we  could  have  defended  our rights completely. But 
since everything is transitory and passing, and death does not die, and the door of the 
grave does not close, and if one suffers hardship, it is transformed into mercy; we shall 
surely  

                                             

16 Qur’an, 3:173. 
17 Qur’an, 9:129. 

 

317

place  our  trust  in  God  in  patience  and  gratitude,  and  be  silent.  To  forcibly  and 
harmfully  break  our  silence  is  totally  opposed  and  contrary  to  justice,  fairness,  and 
patriotic zeal and endeavour.  

the  politicians, 

the  Government, 

To  Conclude:  The  members  of 

the 
administrators, the police, and the judiciary have nothing at all over which to struggle 
with us. At the most, through the bigotry of absolute unbelief, which no government in 
the  world  can  defend  and  no  one  in  their  senses  likes,  and  the  bigotry  of  atheism, 
which  arises  from  materialism  and  is  a  fearsome  plague  afflicting  humanity,  and 
through  their  evil,  certain  covert  atheists  deceive  a  number  of  government  officials, 
excite  their  suspicions,  and  incite  them  against  us.  And  we  say:  if  they  incited  not  a 
few suspicious people like that but the whole world against us, through the strength of 
the  Qur’an  and  Divine  grace,  we  would  not  flee;  we  would  not  lay  down  our  arms 
before that apostasizing absolute disbelief and that atheism! 

                                                                                        S a i d  N u r s i 

 

318

The Thirteenth Ray 

 [The light-scattering, highly valuable letters Ustad Bediuzzaman Said Nursi 
sent his students while in Denizli Prison, which illustrate in brilliant fashion 
the great exertions of the Risale-i Nur.] 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
I congratulate you with all my being on the Night of Power which has passed and 
the coming festival, and I entrust you to the unity and mercy of the Most Merciful of 
the Merciful. Although in accordance with the meaning of “he who believes in Divine 
Determining  is  saved  from  unhappiness,”  I  do  not  consider  you  to  be  in  need  of 
consolation, I say that I received from the allusive meaning of the verse, 

Now await in patience the command of your Sustainer, for verily you are in 
Our eyes, and glorify with praise your Sustainer,1 

all the solace the verse affords. It was like this: 

While  thinking  of  passing  Ramadan  tranquilly, in  forgetfulness of the world, this 
unimaginable and completely unendurable episode befell us, yet I observed that it was 
pure grace both for me, and for the Risale-i Nur, and for you and our Ramadan, and 
our brotherhood. I shall describe only two or three of its many benefits for myself. 

One of them: The intense excitement, seriousness, entreating and seeking refuge 

with God I experienced overcame a serious illness, and made me work in Ramadan. 

                                             

1 Qur’an, 52:48. 

 

319

The Second: I had a powerful desire to see all of you this year and be near you. I 
would  have  agreed  to  the  difficulties  I  have  suffered  to  see  only  one  of  you  and  to 
come to Isparta. 

The  Third:  In  an  extraordinary  way,  all  the  painful  circumstances  both  in 
Kastamonu, and on the way here, and here, suddenly change, and contrary to what I 
hoped and desired a hand of grace is apparent, making one exclaim: “Good is in what 
God chooses.” What made me realize this most was that the most heedless and high-
ranking  persons  are  being  made  to  read  the  Risale-i  Nur  with  careful  attention, 
opening  up  new  fields  for  its  triumphs.  I  was  suffering  all  the  pains  and  regrets  of 
everyone  else  as  well  as  my  own,  but  then  since  this  calamity  increased  the  hundred 
merits  of  each  hour’s  worship  to  a  thousand  —for  the  blessed  month  of  Ramadan 
makes each hour the equivalent of a hundred hours— my pity and sorrow for sincere 
people like you who have learnt thoroughly the lessons of the  Risale-i Nur, so know 
that this is a fleeting place of trade, who sacrifice everything for their belief and lives in 
the  hereafter,  and  believe  that  the  transient hardships of this  ‘School of Joseph’2 will 
produce  everlasting  pleasures  and  benefits,  —my  pity  and  sorrow  for  you  were 
transformed into congratulations and appreciation and applause at your steadfastness. 
I declared: “All praise and thanks be to God for all circum-stances other than unbelief 
and misguidance!”  

I am of the opinion that in this respect there are such benefits both for myself, and 
for our brotherhood, and for the Risale-i Nur, and for our Ramadans, and for you, that 
if the veil was drawn back, it would make us declare: “Thanks be to You, O God! This 
Divine Decree and Determining are an instance of Your grace for us.” 

Do not blame those who were the cause of this affair. The far-reaching and fearful 
plans  for  this  calamity  had  long  since  been  laid,  and  in  the  event  we  have  got  off 
lightly. God willing, it will pass quickly. In accordance with the meaning of the verse, 
It may be that you hate a thing, and it is good for you,3 do not be grieved. 

                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

My Dear Brothers! 
I  am  very  happy  to  be  close  to  you.  From  time  to  time  I  converse  with  you  in 

imagination and am consoled. Know that if it had been possible, I  

                                             
2 See, page 478, footnote 63. 
3 Qur’an, 2:216. 

 

320

would  proudly  and  happily  have  endured  all  your  difficulties.  Because  of  you, I love 
Isparta and its environs down to its very stones and soil. I declare even, and I shall say 
so officially, if the Isparta authorities were to inflict some  penalty on me and another 
province was to acquit me, I would still choose here. 

Yes,  I  am  from  Isparta  in  three  respects.  I  cannot  prove  it  genealogically,  but  I 
have  the  conviction  that  the  forebears  of  Said,  who  came  into  the  world  in  the  sub-
district of Isparit, went there from here. And the province of Isparta has given me such 
true brothers that I would be happy to sacrifice not Abdülmecid4 and Abdurrahman,5 
but Said [myself] for each one of them. 

It is my guess that there is no one on earth at this time who suffers less —in their 
hearts,  spirits,  and  minds—  than  the  Risale-i  Nur  students.  For  due  to  the  lights  of 
certain,  verified  belief,6  their  hearts,  spirits,  and  minds  do  not  suffer  distress.  As  for 
physical  hardships,  they  know  from  the  teachings  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  that  they  are 
both  transitory,  and  unimportant,  and  yield  reward,  and  are  a  means  by  which  the 
service of belief unfolds in other channels, and so meet them with thanks and patience. 
They prove through their states of mind that certain, verified belief leads to happiness 
in  this  world  too.  Yes,  they  say  “Let’s  see  what  God  does,  whatever  He  does,  it  is 
good,”  and  steadfastly  work  to  transform  these  transient  difficulties  into  permanent 
instances of mercy. 

May  the  Most  Merciful of the Merciful increase the numbers of those like them, 
make  them  the  cause  of  pride  and  happiness  for this country, and grant them eternal 
happiness in Paradise. Amen! 

                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
In regard to this Divinely ordained event from the point of view of the justice of 
Divine  Determining:  because  some  of  the  new  students  sought  worldly  things  by 
means  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  which  were  not  in  keeping  with  the  true  meaning  of 
sincerity, they found themselves confronted by self-seeking rivals, and obtaining from 
somewhere a long way off from  

                                             

4 Abdülmecid (d.1967) was Bediuzzaman’s younger brother. He was a teacher of the religious 
sciences, then a Mufti. He translated parts of the Risale-i Nur into Arabic, and others from Arabic 
into Turkish. [Tr.] 

5 Abdurrahman (1903-1928) was the son of Bediuzzaman’s elder brother, Abdullah. He was 
Bediuzzaman’s “spiritual son, student, and assistant,” and joined his uncle in Istanbul after the First 
World War. He published a short biography of Bediuzzaman at that time. [Tr.] 

6 For ‘certain, verified belief,’ see, page 569, footnote 1. 

 

321

me  the  Fifth  Ray,  the  original  of  which  was  written twenty-five years ago and in the 
past  eight  years  copies  of  which  have  only  twice  come  into  my possession  and  were 
then mislaid, a number of jealous people like that corrupt hoja aroused the suspicions 
of  the  judiciary  with  it.  At  the  same  time,  The  Supreme  Sign  (Âyetü’l-Kübra)  was 
printed  without  my  agreement  instead  of  The  Key  To  Belief  (Miftahü’l-Iman 
Mecmuasi), which I wanted printed in the new letters; on the arrival of copies of it, it 
was reported to the Government, and the two matters were confused. Suggesting the 
Fifth  Ray  had  been  printed  in  opposition  to  the  Civil  Code,  some  malicious  people 
made  a  mountain  out  of  a  molehill  and  had  us  put  away  in  this  place  of  penitence. 
Nevertheless, Divine Determining drove us here for our own good; it called us again 
to the ‘School of Joseph,’ where, being far more meritorious than the places of ordeal 
of  former  times,  we  could  receive  a  thorough  lesson  in  sincerity  and  rectify  our 
attachment to the affairs of this world, which in truth are valueless. 

We say in the face of the unfounded suspicions of the worldly: from beginning to 
end the Seventh Ray (The Supreme Sign) is about belief; you have been deceived; it is 
completely different to the Fifth Ray, which has been held strictly private and was not 
found  in  my  possession  in  any  of  the scrupulous searches, and was originally written 
twenty years ago. We did not agree to show it to anyone at the present time, let alone 
have it printed; it nevertheless is a verified prediction, and does not contest anything. 

 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

I again congratulate you on the festival; do not be sorry that we could not meet in 
person.  In  truth  we  are  always  together,  and  God  willing  this  togetherness  will 
continue  on  the  road  to  eternity.  It  is  my  opinion  that  the  eternal  merits,  and  the 
virtues  and  joys  of  the  spirit  and  heart  that  you  obtain  in  serving  belief  reduce  to 
nothing  the  present  temporary,  passing  sorrows  and hardships. Up to now, there has 
been no one who has suffered as few difficulties as the  Risale-i Nur students in such 
sacred  service.  Yes,  Paradise  is  not  cheap.  To  save  others  from  absolute  disbelief, 
which  destroys  the  life  of  both  this  world  and  the  hereafter,  is  of  the  very  greatest 
importance at this time. If there is a little hardship, it should be met with enthusiasm, 
thanks,  and  patience.  Since our  Creator,  Who  employs  us,  is  All-Compassionate and 
Wise, we should rely on His mercy and wisdom and meet everything with resignation 
and joy. 

An heroic brother of ours has assumed all responsibility for  

 

322

The  Supreme  Sign  affair.  He  has  shown  how  much  he  deserves  the  extraordinary 
honour  and  merit  pertaining  to  the  hereafter  he  has  gained  through  his  pen  and  the 
Hizb al-Qur’an7 and Hizb al-Nuri,8 and made me weep at the deep joy I felt. There is 
much wisdom in The Supreme Sign, the Seventh Ray, attracting attention to itself, and 
preparing  the  ground  for  the  future  triumphs  it  deserves:  its  temporary  confiscation 
will not nullify the work and expenses of that brother and his wife; God willing, it will 
make them shine even more. This we await from Divine mercy. 

From  your  brother  who,  through  the  use  of  the  first  person  plural  in  all  his 
supplications, such as: “Deliver us; have mercy on us; preserve us,” includes all of you 
in  them  without  exception;  who  works  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  our 
partnership of the spirit, as though we were numerous bodies and a single spirit and is 
more  concerned  with  your  distress  than  you  are  yourselves;  and  who,  from  your 
collective  personality  awaits  strength,  assistance,  constancy,  steadfastness,  and 
intercession. 

                                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

At a time when, under the effects of this event, I determined to completely resign 
myself to sacrificing myself for my innocent brothers and was seeking for a solution, I 
read  Jaljalutiya.9  It  suddenly  occurred  to  me  that  Imam  ‘Ali  (May  God  be  pleased 
with him) prayed: “O God! Deliver us!”; God willing, you shall be delivered through 
the meaning of his supplication. 

Yes, in his Qasidat al-Jaljalutiya, Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) gave 
news of the Risale-i Nur in two ways, and alluded to The Supreme Sign with the lines 
“And  through  The  Supreme  Sign,  secure  me  from  sudden  disaster.”  Through  this 
allusion,  he  is  indicating  that  due  to  The  Supreme  Sign,  a  disaster  of  significant 
proportions  will  be  visited  on  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  and  is  beseeching  God  to 
deliver the students from the calamity for the sake of The Supreme Sign; he is making 
the treatise and its source an intercessor. Yes, the printing of The Supreme Sign was 
made the pretext for the calamity that occurred, and confirmed exactly that sign of the 
Unseen. 

Also, on the opposite page in the qasida, it says at the end of the allu 

                                             

expounded in, the Risale-i Nur. [Tr.] 

7 Hizb al-Qur’an: A collection of Qur’anic verses, many of which form the basis of, and are 

8 Hizb al-Nuri: A long supplication. See also, page 501 footnote 78. [Tr.] 
9 A qasida written in Syriac and Arabic, which is attributed to ‘Ali b. Abi Talib. [Tr.] 

 

323

sions to the important parts of the Risale-i Nur and their arrangement, in meaning:  

These letters of light, gather together their properties;  
And study their meanings, for through them good is fulfilled. 

That is: “The words and letters of the Risale-i Nur, which we alluded to; collect their 
properties  and  study  their  meanings,  for  all  good  and  happiness  is  achieved  through 
them.”  It  may  be  inferred  from  the  phrase “Study  the meanings of the letters” that it 
refers not to the letters,  which express  no meaning, but to the treatises called Sözler, 
which means The Words.  

Our  Sustainer!  Do  not  call  us  to  task  if  we  forget  or  do  wrong.10  *  None 
knows the Unseen save God. 

                                                                                       S a i d  N u r s i  

My Dear, Loyal Brother, Re’fet Bey! 
I cannot meet with indifference your learned questions since they are the keys to 
important truths contained in the part of the Risale-i Nur called Mektûbat (Letters). A 
short answer is as follows: 

Since  the  Qur’an  is  a  pre-eternal  address  and  speaks  with  all  the  classes  of 
humanity  and  all  the  groups  of  worshippers,  it  has  to  possess  numerous  meanings 
conformable  with  them,  and  numerous  levels  of  the  universal  meanings.  Some 
commentators  choose  only  the  most  general  or  the  most  explicit  meaning,  or  one 
which expresses an obligatory act or a confirmed practice of the Prophet (PBUH). For 
example,  for  the  verse,  And  in  the  night  glorify  God11  they  mention  an  important 
sunna, the two rak‘as of the tahajjud prayer, and for the verse the flight of the stars12 
the early morning Fajr sunna, which is a confirmed Practice of the Prophet (PBUH). 
And  there  are  numerous  other  constituents  of  the  former  meaning.  My  brother! 
Speaking with you does not cease. 

* * * 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
I have just performed the noon prayer and it occurred to me when I was reciting 
the tesbihat that you were all probably sad at thinking of yourselves and your relations 
at home. It suddenly came to mind that if  

                                             

10 Qur’an, 2:286. 
11 Qur’an, 52:49. 
12 Qur’an, 52:49. 

 

324

those  of  former  times  who  chose  the  hereafter  over this world and passed their lives 
mortifying  the  flesh  in  caves  and  other  places  of  ordeal  with  the  intention  of  being 
saved  from  the  sins  of  society  and  of  working  sincerely  for  the  hereafter,  had  lived 
now,  they  would  have  been  Risale-i  Nur  students.  Certainly,  those  living  under  the 
conditions of these times are ten times more needy than they were and gain ten times 
more merit, and are ten times more comfortable. 

My Dear, Blessed Brothers! 
Very many greetings... In former times in my native region, we used to recite Sura 
al-Ikhlas  a  thousand  times  on  the  Day  of  ‘Arafa.13  Now,  I  am  able  to  recite  five 
hundred  on  the  day  before,  and  five  hundred  on  the  Day  of  ‘Arafa.  Those  who  are 
confident may recite them all at once. I cannot see you and cannot speak with you all 
personally, but most of the time I can converse with you all while praying, sometimes 
by name. 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
I reckon that up to now two leaders of the main group of the Light (Nur) Factory 
circle have been saved. That circle, that group, has truly accomplished the triumphs of 
twenty to thirty years in six or seven; as though it was a souvenir of their shining pens, 
their service does not cease; it causes merits to be recorded in the books of their deeds 
in their places. In fact, the Hizb-i Nuri has achieved such overwhelming conquests and 
entered  such  important  places  that  it  is  as  if  those  who  published  it are continuously 
working. I supposed that like the first person, Hafiz Mustafa, who has worked so hard 
and is so hardworking,  was outside, then I heard that he is here too. Thinking it was 
perhaps another Mustafa, I found consolation. 

My Dear Brothers! 
This morning while reciting the tesbihat, I pitied Hafiz Tevfik.14 I recalled that it is 

the second time he has suffered this trouble. Then it  

* * * 

* * * 

* * * 

                                             

13 The eve of the Feast of Sacrifices (‘Id al-Adha). [Tr.] 
14 Sava or Sav: A village close to the town of Isparta and some 50 k. from Barla, the village 
where Bediuzzaman was exiled between 1926-1934. All the inhabitants of Sav, young and old, men 
and women, voluntarily assisted in the writing out and dissemination of the Risale-i Nur. 

 

325

suddenly  occurred  to  me:  Congratulate  him!  With  needless  caution,  he  wanted  to 
withdraw himself a little from his important position and his large share in the Risale-i 
Nur.  But the  vastness  and  sacredness  of  his  service  again  awarded  him  a large share 
and  vast  merit.  One  should not  flee  from  spiritual  honour  such  as that due  to a little 
distress and fleeting hardship. 

Yes, my brothers! Everything departs, and after it has gone, if it was pleasure and 
enjoyment,  it  goes  for  nothing,  while  if  it  was  distress  and  hardship,  it  yields  such 
pleasurable benefits, both in this world and in the hereafter, and from the point of view 
of  being  sacred  service,  that  it  reduces  the  trouble  to nothing. With the exception of 
one of you, I am the most elderly and it is I who suffers the most troubles, yet I assure 
you that by practising total patience, offering thanks, and endurance, I am happy at my 
situation. Thanks in the face of disaster is for the reward to be had from disaster, and 
for the benefits in this world and the next. 

* * * 

My Dear Brothers! 
With the disappearance of the things preventing the completion of the ‘Topics’ of 
The Fruits of Belief, writing will recommence, God willing. One of these was the cold, 
the other was the fright the Masons took at its power. I think of this calamity from the 
angle of Divine Determining, and my difficulties are transformed into mercy. Yes, as is 
explained  in  the  Treatise  On  Divine  Determining,  there  are  two  causes  for  every 
event:  one  is  apparent;  people  base  their  judgements  on  this  and  frequently  act 
unjustly.  The  other  is  reality,  according  to  which  Divine  Determining  judges;  it  acts 
with justice in the events in which man acted unjustly.  

For  example,  a  man  is  sent  to  prison  for  a  theft  he  did  not  commit.  Divine 
Determining also sentences him to imprisonment, but for a secret crime, and acts justly 
within  the  human  injustice.  Thus,  there  are  two  causes  for  our  having  been  set  this 
severe  trial,  the purpose of which is to separate out the diamonds from the pieces of 
glass,  the  veracious  devotees  from  the  inconstant  waverers,  and  the  purely  sincere 
from those unable to give up their egotism and self-interest: 

The First is a powerful solidarity and a sincere and remarkable service of religion 
which aroused the suspicions of the worldly and the politicians; human injustice looks 
to this. 

The Second: Since not everyone on their own could demonstrate their worthiness 

of this sacred service through complete sincerity and total  

 

326

solidarity,  Divine  Determining  looked  to  this  too.  But  that  Determining  is  now  pure 
mercy  for  us  within  the  pure  justice,  for  it  brought  together  brothers  who  greatly 
missed  each  other, and transformed their hardships into worship and their losses into 
alms-giving. It is also pure mercy in many other respects, like attracting attention from 
all  quarters  to  the  treatises  the  brothers  have  written  out;  and  not  allowing  worldly 
possessions  and  children  and  comfort,  which  are  temporary,  fleeting  and  which  one 
day they will be bound to leave behind when they enter the grave, to damage their lives 
in  the  hereafter;  and  making  them  accustomed  to  patient  endurance;  and  their  being 
heroic models for the believers of the future, and even their leaders. But there is one 
aspect  that  caused  me  some  thought,  which  is  that  if  a  finger  is  wounded,  the  eye, 
mind,  and  heart  neglect  their  important  duties  and  become  preoccupied  with  it. 
Similarly, our lives, which reach this pitch of distress, busy our hearts and spirits with 
their wounds. Then just when I should be forgetting the world, the situation took me 
to the Masons’ council, and busied me with dealing them blows. I was consoled by the 
possibility  that  Almighty  God  might  accept  this  state  of  heedlessness  as  a  sort  of 
intellectual striving. 

I  received  the  greetings  of  Ali  Gül,  the  brother  of  Hafiz  Mehmed,  the  Risale-i 
Nur’s esteemed teacher. I send greetings and prayers both to him, and to all his fellow 
villagers, and to all the people of Sava,15 both living and dead. 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Your constancy and steadfastness foil all the plans of the Masons and dissemblers. 
Yes, my brothers, there is no need to hide it, those atheists draw comparisons between 
the Risale-i Nur and its students, and the sufi orders and particularly the Naqshbandi 
Order,  and with  the idea of refuting  us and scattering us, attack us with the schemes 
with which they defeated the sufis. 

Firstly: To intimidate and scare, and show up the abuses of the sufi way. 
And secondly: To publicize the faults of its leaders and followers. 

                                             

15 Sava or Sav: A village close to the town of Isparta and some 50 k. from Barla, the village 
where Bediuzzaman was exiled between 1926-1934. All the inhabitants of Sav, young and old, men 
and women, voluntarily assisted in the writing out and dissemination of the Risale-i Nur. 

 

327

And  thirdly:  To corrupt them with the enticing vices and stupefying, pleasurable 
poisons  of  materialist  philosophy  and  civilization;  and  destroy  their  solidarity;  and 
disparage their leaders with treacherous lies; and discredit their ways with some of the 
principles  of  science  and  philosophy.  They  attacked  us  with  the  same  weapons  they 
used against the Naqshbandis and sufis, but they were deceived. For since the essence 
of  the  Risale-i Nur’s way is complete sincerity, and the giving up of egotism, and to 
search  out  and  perceive  the  mercy  within  difficulties  and  the  permanent  pleasures 
within  pains,  and  to  point  out  the  grievous  pains  within  fleeting  dissolute  pleasures, 
and that belief is the means to innumerable pleasures in this world too, and to teach the 
points and truths that the hand of no philosophy can reach, God willing it will make all 
their plans come to nothing, and showing that no comparison can be made between the 
way of the Risale-i Nur and the sufi orders, it will silence them utterly. 

A Subtle Point 

This  morning  someone  called  me  from  the  gendarmes’  ward  next  to  me  and  I 
went to the window. He said: “Our door has closed by itself and whatever we do we 
can’t open it.” So I told him: “It is a sign for you that among the people you guard and 
keep  behind  bars,  are those who are innocent like yourselves. They even insulted me 
on  the  pretext of  my  seeing  one  of  my  brothers  I had not seen for ten years, and on 
another  pretext,  closed  the  second  of  our  outer  doors.  As  a  punishment,  your  door 
closed too.” 

                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
There  are  three  further  points  concerning  the  subtle  point  I  wrote  to  you 

yesterday: 

The First: As a representative of the collective personality of a blessed group that 
will  be  formed  in  the  future,  through  the  blessings  of  that  collective  personality, the 
bolted door opened of its own accord; again, they were angry with a representative of 
a blessed group which is now in existence meeting with me for half a minute, after ten 
years.  I  too  was  angered,  and  again  said:  “Let  the  doors  close!”  The  following 
morning —it had never happened before— the guards’ doors closed, and did not open 
for two hours. 

Second Elegant Point: I sent a note to the public prosecutor by means  

 

328

of the prison governor. I said in it: “I am being kept in isolation and I can’t meet with 
anyone.  Even  if  I  was to, I do not know anyone in this town. ... with someone from 
the  town  council  here...  and  so  on.”  Later  the  prosecutor  asked  if  I  was  in  solitary 
confinement. The prison governor said: “No.” Both of them objected to my note. The 
same day, a distant and half crazy relation came and visited me for half a minute, and it 
was portrayed in such a way as to show that I had never been in solitary confinement. 
Their objections rebounded on themselves. 

The  Third:  The  noise  of  the  troublesome  youths  next  door  to  me  between  the 
evening  and  night  prayers  disturbed  me,  but  not  too  much.  It  was  that  day that they 
found  an  excuse  and  shut  the  door.  The  foul stench also grew worse in my cell, and 
the  din  the  youths  made  by  my  door  disturbed me excessively. I  again said: “Let the 
doors close! Why are they doing this?” That morning, the incident occurred. 

My Brothers! 
The two Topics you have written in the new letters have had a tremendous effect. 
It will be excellent if the First, Second, and Third Topics are written out as well. But I 
find it worrying if it is Husrev and Tahiri who do this since their pens are particularly 
suited  to  the Qur’an and the Qur’anic script, and are charged with it. It will better if 
others write them. 

My Dear Brothers! 
For the past year I have been using an amount, that is, around a kilo, of vermicelli 
and rice. I have no doubt that they are a means of plenty. But you do not leave them 
with me now so that I can cook them. So I give them to you as a gift, as a means to 
blessings  and  plenty.  On  one  occasion,  I  saw a  wondrous increase in the star-shaped 
vermicelli.  I  used  to  dry  the  pieces  after  cooking  them.  I  myself  and  others  saw that 
one single piece was ten times larger than normal. 

* * * 

* * * 

* * * 

My Dear Brothers! 
Last night while I was reciting my invocations, the guards and others could hear 
me. I wondered anxiously to myself if such a display did not decrease the merit. Then I 
remembered  a  famous  saying  of  Hujjat  al-Islam  Imam  Ghazali:  “Sometimes  doing 
something openly is better than  

 

329

concealing it.” That is, in many ways it may be far more meritorious to do something 
openly, for others may benefit from it, or copy it, or be aroused from heedlessness; or 
it may be display the marks of Islam in the face of those who persist in misguidance or 
vice, and preserve the dignity of religion.  Especially at this time and if done by those 
who  have  learnt  thoroughly  the  lessons  of  sincerity,  and  no  hidden  artificiality 
intervenes. I thought of this and was consoled. 

* * * 

Two  days  ago,  the  examining  magistrate  summoned  me,  and  when  wondering 
how I could defend my brothers, I opened the Hizb al-Masun of Imam Ghazali. These 
verses struck my eye: 

Verily God will defend [from ill] those who believe.16 * ...how their light runs 
forward before them and by their right hands.17 * God watches over them.18 * 
For those... is [every] blessedness.19 

I saw that if the doubling and madda (long a) are not counted —the waw is also a 
madda— according to abjad and jafr reckoning, it makes one thousand three hundred 
and sixty-two, which is exactly this year’s date; both its meaning and number coincide 
with  the  time  we  resolved  to  defend  our  believing  brothers.  All  praise  be  to  God,  I 
said, this leaves no need for my defence. Then the thought “I wonder how it will turn 
out”  occurred  to  me.  I  was  curious.  I  saw  that  according  to  jafr  reckoning,  on 
condition  the  tanwin  is  counted,  the  two  phrases  God  watches  over  them  and  Tuba 
(blessedness) make exactly one thousand three hundred and sixty-two. If one madda is 
not counted, it makes two, and if it is counted, three. Coinciding exactly —at this time 
we  are so needy for Divine preservation— with this year’s date, and with next year’s 
date, it consoles us with the assurance that we shall be preserved, despite an awesome 
assault against us which has been prepared over the last year on a grand scale and over 
a wide field. The Risale-i  Nur’s making more brilliant conquests in ruling circles due 
to  this  episode  means  that  its  temporary  arrest  does  not  and  should  not  cause  us  to 
despair. Also I consider The Supreme Sign’s being confiscated due to its printing to be 
a proclamation, attracting attention from all quarters to its shining station. I have just 
read the verse,  

O our Sustainer! Perfect our light for us, and grant us forgiveness.20 

                                             

16 Qur’an, 22:38. 
17 Qur’an, 57:12. 
18 Qur’an, 42:6. 
19 Qur’an, 13:29. 
20 Qur’an, 66:8. 

 

330

The phrase grant us forgiveness makes exactly one thousand three hundred and sixty-
two.  It  coincides  exactly  with  this  year’s  date,  and  summons  us  and  orders  us  to 
constantly  seek  forgiveness  so  that  our  light  may  be  completed  and  the  Risale-i  Nur 
too not remain deficient. 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
It is my opinion that those who are not shaken by the severe ordeal of these two 
‘Schools of Joseph,’21 the former and the present, and do not abandon its lessons, and 
do  not  give  up  being  its  students  although  their  mouths  have  been  burnt  by  the 
scalding  soup,  and  whose  morale  is  not  broken  despite  all  this  aggression,  will  be 
applauded by the people of reality and coming generations; just as the angels and spirit 
beings  applaud  them.  However,  since  among  you  are  some  who  are  ill,  delicate,  or 
poor,  the  physical  distress  is  excessive.  But  thinking  of  the  others  of  you  consoling 
them  and  being  perfect  examples  in  patience  and  good  conduct,  and  compassionate 
brothers offering solidarity and kind attention, and intelligent companions in discussing 
lessons, and mirrors reflecting fine moral qualities, thus reducing the physical hardships 
to nothing, my concern for you, whom I love more than my own spirit, was allayed. 

One  day,  I  shall  send  you  Mawlana  Khalid’s  jubba,22  which  is  one  hundred  and 
twenty  years  old.  I  invest  each  of  you  with  it  in  his  name,  in  the  same  way  that  he 
invested me with it. Whenever you want it, I shall send it. 

When we first arrived, the doctor gave me a chickenpox vaccination. It formed a 
boil and my arm swelled up. The swelling has moved down my arm; it does not let me 
sleep and makes it difficult to take ablutions. I wonder if I can’t take vaccinations, or if 
it has some other meaning! Twenty years ago they vaccinated me in Ankara, and it still 
suppurates from time to time and causes me pain. I thought of this and hoped the new 
one would not be the same; how are yours? 

                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i 

                                             

21 That is, the prisons of Eskishehir (1935-6) and Denizli (1943-4). [Tr.] 
22 Mawlana Khalid al-Baghdadi (1193/1779-1242/1826-7). One of the most brilliant scholars of 
his age, who was known as the ‘Regenerator’ (Mujaddid) of his age. His ‘jubba’ or gown was given 
to Bediuzzaman in Kastamonu around 1940 by Asiye Hanim, the descendant of one of his ‘khalifas.’ 
[Tr.] 

 

331

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
One reason for the justice of Divine Determining driving us to the Denizli School 
of  Joseph  is  both  its  prisoners,  and  its  people,  and  perhaps  also  its  officials  and 
judiciary  being  in  greater  need  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  its  students  than  people 
anywhere else. It is because of this that we have been put to this arduous test, with a 
task pertaining to belief and the hereafter. Only one or two prisoners out of twenty to 
thirty performed the obligatory prayers as they should be performed; but following the 
Risale-i  Nur  students,  forty  to  fifty  without  exception  have  begun  to  perform  them 
perfectly;  this  is  such  instruction and guidance through the tongue of disposition and 
action, that it reduces to nothing the distress and hardship; indeed, it makes one love 
it.  We  hope  from  Divine  mercy  and  grace  that  just  as  the  students  have  taught  this 
through  their  actions,  so  through  the  powerful  true  belief  in  their  hearts,  they  will 
become like a fortress of steel, delivering the believers from the doubts and suspicions 
of the people of misguidance. 

The worldly here preventing us from speaking and having contact causes no harm. 
The  tongue  of  disposition  is  more  powerful  and  effective  than  verbal  speech.  Since 
imprisonment  is  for training and education, if they love the nation, they should allow 
the  prisoners  to  meet  with  the  Risale-i  Nur students  so  that  in  one  month  or even  a 
day, they may receive more training and education than they would otherwise receive 
in  a  year,  and may all become persons beneficial both to the nation and country, and 
useful  for  their  own  futures  and  their  lives  in  the  hereafter.  It  would  have  been  very 
useful if we had had A Guide For Youth here. God willing, it will be brought in. 
                                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Today I recalled the conversation between my elder brother, Molla Abdullah, and 
Hazret-i Ziyaeddin, which you know about. Then I thought of you and said to myself: 
if  the  Unseen  was  to  be  revealed,  if  each  of  these  sincerely  religious  and  earnest 
Muslims  who  display  such  constancy  in  these  inconstant  times,  not  being  shaken  by 
these  tortuous,  testing  circumstances,  were  to  appear  to  be  saints  or  even  spiritual 
poles, the importance they have in my view, and my concern for them, would increase 
very  little;  or  if  they  were  to  appear  to  be  commonplace  and  ordinary,  the  value  I 
attach  to  them  would  in  no  way  diminish.  For  the  task  of  saving  belief  under  such 
extremely severe conditions is of greater worth than  

 

332

everything. In such stormy, unstable conditions, the virtues afforded by personal ranks 
and the good opinions of others dissolve when those good opinions are destroyed, and 
their  love  lessens.  The  one  possessing  the virtues  then  feels  himself obliged to adopt 
artificial manners, empty formalities, and a burdensome dignity in order to preserve his 
position in their eyes. Endless thanks be to God, we have no need for cold artificiality 
such as that. 

                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
I  congratulate  you  with  all  my  spirit,  heart,  and  mind  on  your  ‘ten  nights,’  and 
beseech Divine mercy that they will bring great gains to our spiritual partnership. Last 
night I dreamt that I had come to you and awoke when I was about to lead the prayers 
as imam.  When, according to my experience, the dream  was going to be interpreted, 
two of our brothers from among the heroes of Sava and Homa arrived in the name of 
all you to interpret it. I was overjoyed, as though I had seen all of you. 

My  Brothers!  Certainly,  the  situation  has  caused  some  officials  and  others  to 
withdraw from the Risale-i Nur, and has scared them, but it has aroused the attention 
of,  and  a  longing  in,  all  opponents  and  religiously  minded  people  and  officials 
connected with the business. Do not worry, these lights shall shine out!23 

* * * 

* * * 

According to Sabri’s interpretation, in conformity with the allusion of Sura Wa’l-
‘Asr, the Risale-i Nur is a means of preserving Anatolia, and Isparta and Kastamonu, 
from  heavenly  and  earthly  calamities,  like  the  ark  on  Mount  Judi;  they  should  not 
therefore  interfere  with  it,  or  the  expected  disasters  will  shortly  be  visited  on  them. 
They should come to their senses. I say again what I said shortly before the disaster, 
and before those letters had been sent to you. According to news I have now received, 
Kastamonu  and  its  surroundings  and  citadel  are  weeping  as  though  mourning  the 
Risale-i Nur; it has caught a fever and is shaking with earthquakes; God willing, it will 
be reunited with the Risale-i Nur, and will laugh again and offer thanks. 
I wrote to you the other day about my two important gains. In the  

                                             

23 Brother, please note! In Denizli Prison, when everything was apparently against him, and the 

prosecution was even seeking his execution, Üstad said: “Don’t worry, my brothers. These Lights 
shall shine out.” See how his words have turned out to be true!   

                                                                                                            Signed, His Students. 
 

 

333

econd  I  said,  offering  supplications  and  glorifications  with  hundreds  of  tongues...  till 
the end. Some is missing here, it should be: Each one of us, according to his degree, 
offers... with hundreds of tongues... and so on. 

Also,  a  venerable  elderly  man  from  the  village  of  Sava,  to  which  I  am  very 
attached,  was  handcuffed  to  me  and  we  came  together;  it  pleased  me  greatly  and  I 
understood  from  it  the  village’s  strong  attachment  to  me.  I  send  special  greetings  to 
that brother. 

My Dear Brother! 
The verse,  

indicates the allusion of  

And even thus did the rejecters of God perish [utterly]24  

By [the token of] time [through the ages], * Verily man is in loss,25 

that  all  the  wars  and  destruction  of  the infidels have caused untold damage and loss. 
There  is  also  an  indication  in  the  phrase  Wa’l-‘Asr  (By  [the  token  of]  time)  which 
points to the date 1360 according to the Rumi calendar, in which year dissemblers and 
disbelievers  would  attack  the  Risale-i  Nur,  but  they  would  be  the  losers.  For  the 
Risale-i  Nur  is  a  cause  of  calamities  like  earthquake  and  war  abating.  It  may  be  a 
concealed sign that its ceasing from activity attracts disaster. 

                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

* * * 

My Dear Brothers! 
It is my guess that our final and true defence will be the short treatise that is the 
fruit  of  Denizli  Prison.  For  the  extensive plots hatched against us over the past  year, 
originally due to unfounded suspicions, are the following: they attacked us on baseless 
pretexts  such  as  founding  a  sufi  order,  establishing  a  secret  society,  being  a  tool  of 
external  forces,  exploiting  religious  feelings  for  political  ends,  working  against  the 
Republic,  meddling  in  government  and  breaching  public  security.  Thanks  be  to 
Almighty God, their plans failed. Other than the truths of belief and the Qur’an, study 
of the hereafter, and working for everlasting bliss, they found nothing, even over such 
an extensive area, among hundreds of students, in hundreds of treatises, in the letters 
and books written over a  

                                             

24 Qur’an, 40:85. 
25 Qur’an, 103:1-2. 

 

334

period of eighteen years. They began to seek out anything at all to make a pretext of, 
in  order  to  conceal  their  plots.  But  I  think  that  in  the  face  of  a  fearsome,  covert 
atheistic  organization  which  has  deceived  some  leaders  of  the  Government,  turning 
them against us, possibly attacking us directly on behalf of absolute disbelief, we were 
made  to  write  the  treatise  of  The  Fruits  of  Belief,  which  is  as  clear  as  the  sun  and 
dispels all doubts and is as firm and unshakeable as a mountain, as the most powerful 
defence against them and to silence them. 

                                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i 

My Brothers! 
Your  place  is  very  constricted,  but  the  expansiveness  of  your  hearts  does  not 
allow  this  to  distress  you;  it  is  also  relatively  freer  than  where  I  am.  Know  that  our 
firmest  strength  and  support  is  solidarity.  Beware!  Do  not  let  irritability  caused  by 
these tribulations make you find fault with one another. Complaining and blaming each 
other and saying “If such-and-such had not happened it would not have been like this” 
is the equivalent of complaining about fate and Divine Determining; do not do this. I 
have  realized  that  there  was  no  way  we  could  have  been  saved  from  their  assaults, 
whatever  we  did  they  would  have  attacked  us.  For  the  short  time  till  Divine  grace 
comes  to  our  assistance,  we  must  respond  with  patience  and thanks,  and  resignation 
towards  the  Divine  Decree  and  submission  to  Divine  Determining,  and  try  to  gain 
plentiful reward and merit with few acts. 

I pray for the well-being of our brothers there. 

                                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers!  
A  significant  solace  in  the  face  of  the  swift  changes  of  this  worldly  life  and  its 
decline, and its fleeting, fruitless pleasures, and its blows of separation, is meeting with 
true friends. Yes, sometimes one travels for twenty days and spends a hundred liras to 
see  a  single  friend for an hour or two. So now in these strange, friendless  times, our 
seeing  forty  to  fifty  friends  all  together  for  one  or  two  months  and  our  speaking 
together  for  God’s  sake  and  receiving  and  giving  true  consolation,  make  these 
difficulties and financial losses that have befallen us extremely cheap and unimportant. 
I myself would have accepted this hardship to see only one of my  

335

* * * 

* * * 

* * * 

 

brothers here after having been parted from them for ten years. Complaint is criticism 
of Divine Determining, while thanks is submission to it.  

I assure you that if the appointed hour was to come now and I was to die, I would 
meet  it  with  perfect  ease  of  heart.  For  I  know  that  among  you  are  many  strong, 
steadfast young Said’s who will ‘own,’ ‘inherit,’ and protect the Risale-i Nur far more 
effectively than this wretched, elderly, ill and debilitated Said. I felt very grateful and 
happy  at  those  whose  names  are  written  in  Nazif’s  note,  who  effectively  strengthen 
morale. I had anyway guessed that they would be thus. May Almighty God give them 
success and make them good examples to others. Amen. 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Since you have attached yourselves to the Risale-i Nur for the hereafter, and for 
good works, and worship and reward, and for belief and your lives in the hereafter, it 
is  surely  necessary  to  offer  thanks  for  your  being  here  to  meet  your  fate  and  eat the 
sustenance  appointed  to  you  and  earn  reward  for  it.  These  have  been  determined  by 
Divine Determining in this School of Joseph, an arena of trial in which each hour in its 
severe conditions is the equivalent of twenty hours’ worship. Since those twenty hours 
are a striving in the service of the Qur’an and belief, they have the value of a hundred 
hours.  And  those  hundred  hours  consist  of  meeting  with  true  brothers,  who  are 
striving on God’s way, each of which have the importance of a hundred people, and to 
pledging  your  brotherhood,  and  strengthening  them  and  receiving  strength,  and 
consoling  them  and  receiving  consolation,  and  steadfastly  persisting  in  this  sacred 
service  in  true  solidarity,  and  profiting  from  their  fine  qualities,  and  acquiring 
worthiness  to  be  students  of  the  Medresetü’z-Zehra.  It  is  necessary  to  think  of  all 
these  benefits  in  the  face  of  all  the  hardships,  and  to  respond  to  them  with  patient 
endurance. 

                                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i 

My Brothers! 
I  sincerely  hoped  that  resolute  heroes  like  those  of  Isparta  and  its environs (like 
the Husrev’s and Hafiz Ali’s), strong as steel, would appear here from Kastamonu as 
well.  Endless  thanks  be  to  God  that  that  province  fulfilled  my  hopes,  sending 
numerous heroes to our assistance. I  

 

send  greetings  to  all  my  self-sacrificing  brothers  who  are  with  you,  who  are  always 
present in my imagination but whose names I cannot write, and I pray for their well-
being. 

My Dear, Loyal, Constant, and Faithful Brothers! 
I am describing some of my circumstances here, not to sadden you or to take any 
physical measures, but so that I might profit more from your shared prayers, and you 
might  practise  greater  self-restraint,  caution, patience, and forbearance, and earnestly 
perserve your solidarity. The torment and distress I suffer here in one day is more than 
I  suffered  in  a  month  in  Eskişehir  Prison.  The  ghastly  Masons  have  inflicted  one  of 
their unfeeling fellows on me so that out of anger I should lose patience in the face of 
their torments, and they could then use it as a pretext and make it the reason for their 
cruel  aggression,  and  so  conceal  their  lies.  As  a  wondrous  mark  of  Divine  grace,  I 
merely offer thanks in patience and I am resolved to continue to do so. 

Since  we  have  submitted  to  Divine  Determining  and  in  accordance  with  the 
meaning  of  “The  best  of  matters  are  the  most  difficult,”26  and  we  know  these 
difficulties to be a Divine bounty through which we may gain greater merit; and since 
we have the absolutely certain conviction, at the degree of ‘absolute certainty,’ that we 
have dedicated our lives to a truth more brilliant than the sun, as beautiful as Paradise 
and  sweet  as  eternal  happiness;  certainly,  knowing  that  we  are  carrying  out  this 
immaterial struggle in God’s way, proudly and offering thanks, despite the distressing 
conditions, we should not complain. 

My Dear Brothers! 
My  first  and  last  advice  to  you  is  to  preserve  your  solidarity;  avoid  egotism, 

selfishness, and rivalry, to preserve your composure, and be cautious. 

                                                                           S a i d  N u r s i 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
It  is  understood  from  the  public  prosecutor’s  indictment  that  the  plans  of  the 

covert atheists who deceived some of the leaders of the  

336

* * * 

* * * 

* * * 

                                             

26 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa, i, 155. 

 

337

Government,  prompting  them  to  move  against  us,  have  come  to  nothing  and  turned 
out to be false. They are now  trying to conceal their lies by accusing us of forming a 
political society and a secret revolutionary committee, and as a result of this, they do 
not allow me to have contact with anyone. As though all those who have contact with 
us join us. High officials too are careful to avoid us, and they try to curry favour with 
their superiors by harassing us. I was going to add the below passage to the end of my 
objections, but I had an idea that did not allow me to. The passage was this: 

Yes,  we are a society and we are a society that every century has three hundred 
and  fifty  million27  members.  Every  day  through  the  five  obligatory  prayers,  its 
members  demonstrate  with  complete  veneration  their  attachment  to  the  principles  of 
that  sacred  society.  Through  the  sacred  programme  of  The  believers  are  indeed  a 
single brotherhood,28 they hasten to assist one another with their prayers and spiritual 
gains. We are members of that sacred, vast society, and our particular duty is to teach 
the  believers  in  certain,  verified  fashion  the  Qur’anic  truths  of  belief,  and  save  them 
and  ourselves  from  eternal  annihilation  and  everlasting  solitary  confinement  in  the 
Intermediate Realm. We have absolutely no connection with any worldly, political, or 
intriguing  society  or  clandestine  group,  or  the  baseless,  meaningless  secret  societies 
concerning which we have been charged; we do not condescend to such things. 

* * * 

My Dear and Loyal Brothers! 
Before dawn today I felt real pity for all of you. Then I remembered the Treatise 

For The Sick (Hastalar Risalesi ), and it consoled me. 

Yes,  this  calamity  is  a  sort  of  social  sickness.  Most  of  the  remedies  connected 
with belief in that treatise are in this too. As I told that blessed sick person in Erzurum, 
the  pain  of  all  past  tribulations  has  passed;  what  remains  of  it  is  its  good,  and  its 
benefits that look to this world, the hereafter, belief,  and  the Qur’an. That means the 
single  transitory  tribulation  has  been  transformed  into  numerous  permanent bounties. 
As  for  the  future,  since  it  is  non-existent  at  the  present,  the  tribulations  that  will 
continue in it give no pain now. To suffer pain due to delusions is to lack confidence in 
Divine mercy and Determining. 

Secondly: Most of mankind on the earth now are afflicted with  

                                             

27 Now one and a half thousand million. [Tr.] 
28 Qur’an, 49:10. 

 

338

calamities, physical and non-physical, and in their hearts, spirits, and minds. Compared 
with theirs, our calamity is both extremely light, and profitable. There are pleasures for 
the heart and spirit, springing from belief, good health, and well-being. 

Thirdly:  If  we  had  not  entered  here  amid  these  storms,  due  to  our contact with 
suspicious officials, this slight calamity would have been even severer, and there would 
have been the calamity of having to toady to them and flatter them. 

Fourthly:  Seeing  with  very  little  expense  true  friends  more  compassionate  than 
brothers,  and  brothers  of  the  hereafter  like  spiritual  guides,  here  in  the  workless, 
compounded  physical  and  spiritual  winter  of  this  School  of  Joseph,  which  is  a 
department  of  the  Medresetü’-Zehra;  and  visiting them,  profiting from  their personal 
qualities,  and  receiving  strength  from  their  fine  characteristics,  which  like  light  are 
diffused  through  transparent  objects,  and  from  their  spiritual  assistance,  joy,  and 
consolation;  all  changes  the  form  of  this  calamity,  making  it  a  sort  of  veil  to  Divine 
grace. Yes, a subtle facet of this hidden grace is that all the Risale-i Nur students here 
are called “Hoja;” they are spoken of respectfully as “the hojas... the hojas.” There is 
a  further  subtle  allusion  in  this,  that  just  as  this  prison  has  turned  into  a  medrese 
(religious  school),  so  the  Risale-i  Nur students have all become teachers, and thanks 
to these hojas the other prisons will also all become schools, God willing. 

* * * 

My Brothers! 
If  the  short  letters  written  before  to  console  you,  like  this  one,  are  read  and 
studied  together  with  the  last  parts  of  The  Fruits  of  Belief,  and  any  matters  of  the 
Risale-i  Nur  that  occur  to  you  are  discussed,  God  willing  it  will  gain  for  you  the 
honour  of  being  ‘students  of  the  religious  sciences.’  Pre-eminent  figures  like  Imam 
Shafi‘i (May his mystery be sanctified) attached the greatest importance to this, saying 
“the sleep even of students of the sciences is counted as worship.” If at this time of no 
religious schools, a hundred difficulties are suffered in these places of torment due to 
being  such  elevated students, no  importance should be given to them, or else, saying 
“The best matters are the most difficult,” we should smile happily at those hardships. 
As  for  the  families  of  our  needy  friends  and  their  having  enough  to  live  on,  in 
consequence of the rule of the Qur’an, belief, and the Risale-i Nur, which is to look at 
those  worse  hit  by  disaster  than  oneself  and  at  those  in  greater  deprivation,  they are 
better off than eighty per cent of people. They have no right to complain; their right,  

 

339

their obligation, is to offer eighty degrees of thanks. Divine Determining ordained that 
we meet our fate here and eat the food appointed for us. The justice of Divine mercy 
gathered  us  together  here;  the  families  have  been  entrusted  to  their  true  Provider, 
relieving those brothers temporarily of their duties of supervision. Just as one day they 
will be relieved of them entirely and dismissed... Since the reality is this, we should say 
For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs,29 and offer thanks. 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
For sure I can’t meet with you in person, but I am happy and thankful that I am 
close  to  you  in  the  same  building.  It  came  to  me  involuntarily  that  some  necessary 
precautions  should  be  taken.  One  of  these:  a  prisoner  was  sent  to  the  ward  next  to 
mine by the Masons who is both a liar and a spy. Since destruction is easy, especially 
among idle youths such as those, I knew from the scoundrel’s excessive harassment of 
me and his corrupting the youths, that atheism is attempting to corrupt their morals in 
the  face  of  our  guiding  and  reforming  them.  Extreme  caution  is  necessary  in  this 
situation, and it is absolutely essential as far as is possible not to be offended by the old 
prisoners nor to offend them and not to allow any disagreements, and to keep cool and 
put  up  with  things,  and  as  far  as  is  possible  for  our  brothers  to  strengthen  their 
brotherhood  and  solidarity  through  humility  and  modesty  and  giving  up  egotism.  It 
pains  me  to  concern  myself  with  worldly  matters,  so  having  confidence  in  your 
perceptiveness, I do not consider them so long as it is not essential. 

                                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

* * * 

My Brothers! 
Against  all  eventualities, I have to explain a matter that was imparted to me this 
morning. Asking: “I wonder what atheist philosophers can say to this, and with what 
will  they  support  themselves?”,  for  twenty  years  my  soul  and  my  satan  have 
investigated whether or not the truths we have taken from the Qur’an leave any room 
for doubt or hesitation, and if they are as clear as daylight. They could find no fault in 
any  nook  or  cranny,  and  fell  silent.  I  reckon  that  a  truth which  silences  my  soul  and 
devil, which are extremely sensitive and involved in the matter, will silence also even 
the most obdurate of them. Since we are working for the sake of and  

                                             

29 Qur’an, 3:173. 

 

340

on the way of a truth which is thus unshakeable, elevated, vast, and important, and is 
of inestimable value, and if the whole world and a person’s life was given as its price, 
it would still be cheap; we should certainly respond with complete steadfastness to all 
the tribulations, distress, and enemies. They have also confronted us with a number of 
deceived  or  hoodwinked  hojas,  shaykhs,  and  apparently  pious  people.  We  must 
preserve  our  unity  and  solidarity  in  the  face  of  them,  and  not  bother  with  them  or 
argue with them. 

                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
It  was  disclosed  to  me  this  morning  before  dawn  that  the  real  reason  for  this 
extensive  and  significant  aggression  against  us  is  not  the  Fifth  Ray,  but  the  Hizb  al-
Nuri,  and  The  Key  To  Belief,  and  Hüccetü’l-Baliga  (The  Eloquent  Proof).30  I  read 
part of the Hizb al-Nuri carefully, and thought of The Key To Belief, and I understood 
that  the  atheists  had  put  forward  the  Fifth  Ray,  which  has  a  slight  connection  with 
politics,  as  the  apparent  reason,  because  they could not defend their way of absolute 
disbelief  against  the  blows  of  these  two  keen  swords.  So  they  deceived  the 
Government,  making  it  move  against  us.  It  occurred  to  me  at  the  same  time  that  if 
some of our weak brothers temporarily give up, they might be able to save themselves 
from this calamity, and I wanted to give them permission. Suddenly it was imparted to 
me  that  those  who  are  closely  concerned  and  have  twice been put to this test and in 
return  have  suffered  so  much  hardship,  would  not  then  give  it  up  in  a  heartfelt  way 
that  was  both  harmful  and  without  benefit,  but  might  possibly  apparently  hold  back 
just to deceive them. It would otherwise cause harm both to himself, and to us, and to 
our  sacred  way,  and  as  a  penalty,  the  person  would  receive  a  blow  contrary  to  his 
intentions. 

* * * 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Certainly  according  to  the  degree  of  their  being  the  cause  of  this  imprisonment, 
which  is  more  distressing  and  colder  than  other  places,  those  who  are  suffering  its 
hardships will feel inclined to escape them. But since the certain, verified belief that the 
Risale-i Nur —its apparent  

                                             

30 The second part of the collection from the Risale-i Nur called Âsâ-yi Musâ (The Staff of 

Moses). It consists of 11 pieces proving the fundamentals of belief. [Tr.] 

 

341

cause—  gains  for  those  who  suffer  these  hardships,  and  the  happy  death  its  gains 
through  the  certain,  verified  belief,  and  the  good  works  of  a  hundred  men  it  gains 
through  the  spiritual  partnership,  all  transform  the  bitter  hardship  into  sweet  mercy, 
then  the  price  of  these  two  results  is  unshakeable  fidelity  and  steadfastness.  To  be 
regretful and give it up would therefore be a great loss. For those of the students who 
have  no  connection  with  the  world,  or  very  little,  this  imprisonment  is  preferable  to 
freedom,  and  in  one  respect  is  a  place  of  freedom.  While  since  for  those  who  are 
connected  and  who  are  well-off,  the  money  spent  becomes  multiple  almsgiving,  and 
the hours spent are transformed into multiple worship, they should offer thanks rather 
than  complaining.  As  for  those  who  are  impecunious  and  needy,  their  lives  outside 
afford  them  merits  that  are  without  benefit  and  hardships  for  which  they  are 
responsible, while the hardships here produce many merits and much reward and entail 
no  responsibility,  and  are  alleviated  by  the  solace  of  their  companions;  this  demands 
that they offer thanks. 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
A pious person in Kastamonu said by way of complaint: “I have declined; I have 

lost my former spiritual state, lights, and illuminations.” I told him: 

“Perhaps you have progressed so that you have left behind your illuminations and 
revelations, which flatter the ego, give a taste of the fruits of the hereafter while still in 
this  world,  and  encourage  self-centredness.  By  giving  up  egotism  and  not  seeking 
fleeting  pleasures  and  through  self-abasement,  you  have  perhaps  flown  to  a  higher 
station.” Yes, an important Divine bounty is not making the person who has given up 
his egotism perceive the bounty so that he does not become proud and conceited. 

My  brothers!    In  consequence  of  this  truth,  those  who  think  similarly  to  that 
person or who take into account the brilliant stations that the good opinions of others 
give,  look  at  you,  and  among  you  see  the  students  who  appear  in  the  garment  of 
humility and self-abasement and service, to be common, ordinary people, and they say: 
“Are these the heroes of reality who challenge the whole world? Alas! Who are these? 
Where  are  the  people  who  are  striving  to  perform  this  sacred  service,  before  which 
even  the  saints  are  impotent  at  this  time?”  If  they  are  friends,  they  experience 
disappointment, and if opponents, find their opposition justified. 

                                                                       S a i d  N u r s i 

 

342

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
In my view your prison fruits31 are as agreeable and valuable as fruits of Paradise. 
They  confirm  the  great  hopes  I  had  for  you  and  what  I  had  claimed,  as  well  as 
demonstrating  beautifully  the power  of  solidarity.  As  when  three  or four ‘alifs’32 are 
put side by side, those blessed pens uniting while suffering severe oppression showed a 
value of three or four hundred. The state of mind which preserves your unity in these 
confused  conditions  proves  what  I  said  yesterday.  Yes  —there  is  no  error  in  the 
comparison—  just  as  according  to  the  Sunnis  the  position  of  a  great  saint  regarding 
service  of  Islam  is  lesser  than  that  of  a  Companion  of  the  Prophet  (PBUH),  so  a 
sincere brother who forgoes the pleasures of the soul in serving belief at this time and 
practising  humility  preserves  solidarity  and  unity,  is  afforded  a  position  higher  than 
that of a saint. This was the conclusion I came to and you confirm it constantly. May 
God be eternally pleased with you. Amen! 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
The Fruits of Belief is most important and very valuable. It is my hope that in time 
it will achieve great triumphs. It seems you have thoroughly understood its value, for 
you have not left this place of study without lessons. On my own account I say that if 
the fruit of all this trouble and expense is only this treatise and Müdâfaa Risalesi (The 
Defence  Speeches),  and  being  together  with  you  in  the  same  place,  it  reduces  to 
nothing the expense and the trouble, and even if I were to suffer this calamity ten times 
over, it would still be cheap. 

Due  to  many  experiences  and  especially  in  this  distressing,  restricted  prison,  I 
have  formed  the  firm  conviction  that  being  occupied  with  the  Risale-i  Nur,  both 
reading  it  and  writing  it  out,  greatly  lessens  the  distress  and  gives  one  a  feeling  of 
expansiveness.  When  I  am  not  busy  with  it,  the  calamity  doubles  and  I  am  upset  by 
trifling  things.  Although  I  reckoned  that  for  various  reasons  Husrev,  Hafiz  Ali  and 
Tahiri  would  be  suffering  most, I saw that it was they and those with them who had 
the greatest composure and submission and ease of heart. I asked myself why. Now I 
have  understood  that  they  are  carrying  out  their  true  duties;  since  they  are  not 
occupied  with  anything  frivolous,  and  do  not  interfere  in  the  functions  of  Divine 
Decree and Determining, and are not boastful, critical, or  

                                             

31 That is, the treatises they had written out, particularly The Fruits of Belief. [Tr.] 
32 Alif: the first letter of the Arabic alphabet, written as a vertical stroke, the numerical value of 

which is one. [Tr.] 

 

343

panicky,  all  of  which  spring  from  egotism,  with  their  self-possession  and  their 
steadfastness  and  peace  of mind, they have exonerated the Risale-i Nur students and 
demonstrated their moral strength in the face of atheism. May Almighty God make the 
true  dignity  and  heroism  within  their  utter  humility  and  self-abasement  spread  to  all 
our brothers. Amen! 

My Brothers! 
A  fearful  egotism  arising  from  heedlessness  and  love  of  this  world  rules  at  this 
time. The people of reality, therefore, have to give up egotism and selfishness, even if 
it is in a licit form. Since the Risale-i Nur students dissolve their egotism, which is an 
ice-block,  in  the  joint  pool  of  their  collective  personality,  they  will  not  be  shaken  by 
this  storm,  God  willing.  Yes,  a  well-tried  method  of  the  dissemblers  is  to  collect 
together  people  who  are  all  like  officers  and  judges,  concerning  some  common 
question in constraining places which make them stand-offish, and irritable and critical 
of  each  other;  stirring  them  up  so  they  fight  among  themselves,  they  destroy  their 
morale. The dissemblers then easily deal blows at those who have lost their strength, 
and  kill  them.  Since  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  have  taken  the  way  of  love  and 
brotherhood  and  ‘annihilation  in  the  brothers,’  God  willing,  they  will  foil  this  well-
tried, divisive stratagem. 

* * * 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
One  time,  a  shaykh  had  so  many  followers  the  Government  became  anxious 
regarding  its  political  implications  and  wanted  to  scatter  his  community.  The  shaykh 
told the Government: “I only have one and a half followers. No others. If you like we 
can put it to the test.” So he had a tent pitched somewhere and gathered together all 
his  thousands  of  followers  there.  He  told  them:  “I  am  going  to  put  you  to  the  test. 
Whoever  is  my  disciple  and  complies  with  my  command  will  go  to  heaven.”  He 
summoned  them  into  the  tent  one  by  one.  He  had  a  sheep  slaughtered  secretly,  as 
though  he  had  killed  his  favourite  disciple  and  sent  him  to  Paradise.  When  the 
thousands of followers saw the blood, they no longer obeyed the shaykh and started to 
denounce  him.  Only  one  man  said  “May  I  be  sacrificed  for  you,”  and  went  to  him. 
Then  a  woman  went  to  him  too,  and  the  rest  dispersed.  The  shaykh  told  the 
government men: “Now you have seen for yourselves that I only have one and a half 
followers.” 

Endless thanks be to Almighty God that in the test and trial of Eski 

 

344

şehir, the Risale-i  Nur lost only one and a half of its students. Through the efforts of 
the heroes of Isparta and its surroundings, in their place ten thousand were added, just 
the opposite to the shaykh. God willing, in this  ordeal too, through the efforts of the 
heroes of both the east and the west, few will be lost, and ten will come in place of any 
one that goes. 

One  time,  someone  who  was  not  a  Muslim  found  a  way  of  succeeding  to  the 
leadership of a sufi order and began to give guidance. The disciples under his training 
began  to  advance,  then  one  of  them  saw  through  a  revelation  that  their  guide  had 
suffered  a  serious  decline.  With  his  insight,  the  guide  told  his disciple: “So you have 
understood.” But the disciple said: “Since it was with your guidance that I rose to this 
station, I shall follow you even closer from now on.” He beseeched Almighty God and 
saved  his  unhappy  shaykh,  who  all  of  a  sudden  advanced,  and  outflanking  all  his 
disciples, again became their true guide. This means that sometimes a disciple becomes 
the  shaykh’s  shaykh.  But  the  true  skill  is  that  when  one  sees  his  brother  in  a  bad 
situation,  he  does  not  abandon  him,  but  strengthens  their  brotherhood  and  tries  to 
reform him. This is the mark of the loyal and faithful. Because the dissemblers want to 
destroy  the  solidarity  of  brothers  in  such  situations  and  spoil  their  good  opinions  of 
each other, they say: “See, those you think so highly of are common, ordinary people.” 
Anyway, we have suffered much in this calamity, but since it is a matter concerning the 
whole world of Islam, it is very cheap and of high value. Due to their being politics of 
religion  or  for  other  reasons,  similar  events  have  not  been  of  concern  for  the  whole 
Islamic world.  

* * * 

*  *  * 

Since  the  strange  signature  at  the  beginning  of  the  printed  edition  of  the  Old 
Said’s  work  Lemeât  coincides  with  little  change  with  my  present  circumstances  and 
exactly  with  my  seventy-second  year,  I  have  included  it  here.  If  you  consider  it 
suitable,  you can add  it to the end of the defences in place of a signature, and to the 
Fruits and the short letters. That strange signature consists of the following three and a 
half lines: 

The Supplicant 

My demolished grave in which are heaped up sixty-nine dead Said’s with his sins 

The  seventieth  is  a  gravestone  to  a  grave;  altogether  they  weep  at  Islam’s 

and sorrows. 

decline. 

 

I  have  hope  that  the  skies  of  the  future  and  Asia  will  together  surrender  to 

Islam’s clean, shining hand,  

For it promises the prosperity of belief; it affords peace and security to mankind. 

345

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
The reason for the supreme importance I give your solidarity is not only because 
of its advantages for us and the Risale-i Nur, but for the mass of believers who are not 
within  the  sphere  of  certain,  verified  belief,  and  are  much need of a point of support 
and  a  truth  which  a  community  unshaken  by  events  finds  certain.  Since  it  is  an 
authority,  a  guide,  a  proof,  which  is  unfearing,  unflinching,  incorruptible,  and 
undeceiving  in  the  face  of  the  currents  of  misguidance,  one  who  sees  your  powerful 
solidarity forms the conviction that there is a truth that may be sacrificed for nothing, 
that does not bow before the people of misguidance, nor is it defeated; his morale and 
belief are strengthened, and he is saved from joining the worldly and their vice. 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Beware! Do not dispute among yourselves, spying ears will take advantage of it. 
Right or wrong, those who argue in our situation are wrong. Even if they are right to 
one degree, by disputing they could cause us untold harm. 

I shall repeat a story I once told my irritable brothers in Eskişehir Prison. During 
the  Great  War,  I  was  being  held  as a prisoner together with ninety  officers in a long 
dormitory in northern Russia. Since they had a regard for me far higher than was my 
due,  through  my  advice  to  them,  I    did  not  allow  any  noise  or  trouble.  But  then, 
irascibility  arising  from  the  constraints  and  irritations  began  to  give  rise  to  violent 
rows. I told three or four of them that whenever they heard a noisy dispute, to go and 
help those in the wrong. They did this, and the damaging rows ceased. They asked me 
why I had taken such unjust precautions, and I told them: 

“A person who is in the right, is fair; he will sacrifice his one ‘dirhem’s’ worth of 

right for the general peace, which is worth a hundred  

 

‘dirhems.’ Those in the wrong are mostly egotistical; they will sacrifice nothing, so the 
din increases.” 

346

* * * 

My Brothers! 
You should repeatedly and carefully read the pieces in the treatise containing the 
short  letters,  which  are  a  means  of  consolation  and  enjoin  forbearance  and  patient 
endurance.  I  am  the  weakest  of  you  and  I  have  the  greatest  share  of  this  distressing 
calamity. Thanks be to God, I am enduring it and I have not been vexed by those who 
have piled all the blame on me, nor annoyed at those who because it is the same matter 
have defended themselves alone, and implying we have formed a political association, 
put  the  blame  on  me.  I  request  that  since  we  are  brothers,  you  imitate  me  in  this 
patience. 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers and Friends in this Hostel of the World! 
I  thought  tonight  of  our  being  led  handcuffed  together  to  the  court  by  soldiers 
with  bayonets  fixed.  The  Old  Said’s  proud  vein  of  temperament  made  me  feel 
exceedingly angry. But it was suddenly imparted to me that we should respond to this 
situation  not  with  anger,  but  with  pride,  thanks,  and  joy,  for  in  the  eyes  of  the 
intelligent,  and  of  incalculable  numbers  of  angels  and  spirit  beings  and  the  people  of 
reality  and  those  among  men  with consciences and certain, verified belief, we appear 
as a caravan of heroes on the way of truth, reality, the Qur’an, and belief, challenging 
this century. In the face  of their elevated regard, applause, and appreciation, which is 
indicative  of  dominical  acceptance  and  Divine  mercy,  the  insulting  looks  of a limited 
number of dissolute layabouts, can be of no importance. One day, even, when I went 
by car because of illness, I felt a constrictedness. But then when I went together with 
you with my hands bound, I felt an expansiveness and joy of the spirit. That is to say, 
my state of mind arose from this meaning. 

I have said it many times and I shall repeat it: none have been seen in history who 
have performed as great service on the way of truth and have earned so much reward 
while  suffering  so  little  difficulty,  as  the  Risale-i  Nur  students.  However  much 
hardship we suffer, it is still not costly. 

 

347

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise. 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Our  escaping  from  this  calamity  and  being  saved  from  it  is  impossible  in  two 

respects: 

The  First:  Since  Divine  Determining  appointed  that we should meet part of our 

fate here, we would anyway have come here. This way is therefore the best. 

The  Second:  We  found  no  way  of  being  saved  from  the  plots  that  were  being 
hatched against us. I perceived them, but there was no way out. The unfortunate late 
Shaykh  Abdülhakim,  and  Shaykh  Abdülbaki  could  find  no  way  to  save  themselves. 
This  means  that  to  complain  about  one  another  in  this  calamity  is  both  unjust,  and 
meaningless, and harmful, and is to feel a sort of offence at the Risale-i Nur. Beware! 
To  consider  some  of  the  activities  of  the  leading  students  to  be  the  cause  of  this 
calamity and to feel indignant at them, is to withdraw from the Risale-i Nur and regret 
having  learnt  the  truths  of  belief.  This  is  a  far  greater  calamity  than  the  material 
calamity.  I  swear  that  although  my  share  of  this  calamity  is  twenty  or  thirty  times 
greater than each of yours, because they have acted with a pure intention, I would not 
be annoyed at them even if the calamity, which occurred due to lack of caution, was 
ten times greater. It is also meaningless to object to things that are past, because they 
cannot be repaired. 

My Brothers! Anxiety doubles the calamity; it also  roots the physical calamity in 
the  heart;  it  also  suggests  objection  to  and  criticism  of  Divine  Determining  and 
accusation against Divine mercy. Since everything has a good side and in everything is 
a  manifestation  of  Divine  mercy,  and  Divine  Determining  works  with  justice  and 
wisdom;  we  are  surely  bound  not  to  give  importance  to  any  slight  trouble  we  may 
suffer  as  a  result  of  the  sacred  task  we  are  performing  which  concerns  the  whole 
Islamic world at this time. 

 

348

 [An  unimportant,  commonplace  condition  of  mine  necessitated  that  I  write 
this to you.] 

My Brothers! 
I have formed the firm conviction that the evil eye affects me severely and makes 
me ill. I have experienced it on numerous occasions. I want with all my heart and soul 
to be a companion to you in all circumstances, but in accordance with the famous rule, 
“The evil eye puts the camel in the cooking-pot and man into his grave,”33 the evil eye 
has  an  effect  on  me.  For  those  who  look  at  me,  do  so  with  either  violent  hatred,  or 
appreciation.  Both  these  are  present  in  the  looks  of  some  people  who  possess  the 
ability  to  affect  with  the  evil  eye.  I  have  formed  the  intention  therefore  that  if  it  is 
possible  and  they  do  not  force me,  I shall not always accompany you while going to 
the court. 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise. 

My Dear Brothers! 
This  morning  before  dawn  a  piece  was suddenly imparted to me. Yes, I confirm 
the  wonder  (keramet)  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  concerning  the  earthquake  what  Husrev 
wrote in detail; what I thought also centred on that. For just as the coinciding of the 
four  occasions  of  severe  aggression  against the Risale-i Nur and its students and the 
four  occasions  of  the  assaults  of  earthquakes  were  not  chance,  so  the  exact 
coincidence  of  the  two  centres  of  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  dissemination,  Isparta  and 
Kastamonu, being preserved from disaster relative to other places; and as alluded to by 
Sura  al-‘Asr,  since  the  means  of  salvation  from  the  Second World War —mankind’s 
greatest ‘loss’ at the end of time— is belief and good works; it cannot be mere chance 
that the Risale-i Nur has spread certain, verified belief all over Anatolia, and Anatolia 
was saved from the great losses of war in extraordinary fashion. Also, just as the exact 
coinciding  of  those  who  impede  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  service  or  those  who  err  in  that 
service  receiving  blows  either  of  compassion  or  wrath,  cannot  be  mere  chance  —of 
which  there  have  been  hundreds  of  incidents;  so  too  the  thousands  of  incidents  of, 
almost  without  exception,  all  those  who  serve  the  Risale-i  Nur  well  experiencing 
plenty in their livelihoods and ease of mind and happiness, cannot be mere chance. 

                                             

Qadir, no: 5748. 

33 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa, ii, 76; al-Maghribi, Jami’ al-Shaml, ii, 49; al-Munawi, Fayd al-

 

349

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
According to the inner meanings of “good is in what God chooses,” and, 

It may be that you hate a thing and it is good for you,34 

the most confidential pieces of the Risale-i Nur have emerged from behind the veil of 
“sirran tenevveret”35 so as to come into the possession of the most undesirable people, 
to  strike  the  arrogant,  and  show  up  the  errors  of  those  at  the  top.  They  wanted  to 
make  the  matter  appear  unimportant,  but  somehow  or  other  they  understood  that  it 
has  great  importance,  and  attracting  attention  to  it  in  a  big  way,  leads  to  shining 
triumphs for the Risale-i Nur and its enemies being made to read it in wonderment. In 
fact,  it  illuminated  many  hesitant,  bewildered,  and  needy  people  during  the  Eskişehir 
trials,  and  saved  them,  transforming  our  hardships  into  mercy.  God  willing,  on  this 
occasion  it  will  perform  that  sacred  service  on  a  wider  scale,  in  many  courts  and 
centres.  Yes,  those  who  see  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  style  and  explanations  cannot  remain 
indifferent to it. It not only makes the mind and heart submit like other works, it also 
conquers the soul and emotions. 

Your  being  released  causes  no  harm  to  this  fact,  but  my  acquittal  would  be 
detrimental.  Even  my  soul  agrees  to  sacrifice  for  a  truth  that  concerns  the  whole 
Islamic  world  not  only  the  life  of  this  world  but  if  necessary that of the next, and to 
sacrifice through the Risale-i Nur my own happiness for that of the people of belief. 

* * * 

[Included  here  is  the  continuation  of  the  earthquake  incident  from  Husrev’s 
letter; the beginning is not included.] 

I  later  saw  in  another  newspaper,  the  following  amazing,  complementary  facts: 
before the earthquake, the cats and dogs gathered together in groups of four or five. 
They  silently  sat  down  together  looking  at  each  other  pensively  and  blankly,  then 
dispersed.  None  of  these  animals  was  to  be  seen  either  during  the  earthquake,  or 
immediately before it, or after it; they disappeared into the countryside away from the 
towns. Another strange thing they write is that these animals gave news of the coming 
disaster, which resulted from our sins, through the tongue of disposition, and they did 
not understand it and are amazed. 

Among the hundreds of things that for years Bediuzzaman has  

                                             

34 Qur’an, 2:216. 
35 A  phrase quoted from the qasida ‘al-Jaljalutiya’. See, footnote 9 above. 

 

350

predicted  in  the  Risale-i  Nur,  is  that  the  atheists  should  avoid  interfering  with  the 
Risale-i  Nur  and its  students,  for  if harm comes to them, the disasters waiting in the 
offing will make them regret it a hundred time over. The earthquake verified this with 
its signature, then four more disasters occurred... May Almighty God bestow belief on 
our  hearts  and  on  the  hearts  of  those  who  attack  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  give  them 
minds  that  will  recognize  the  truth,  and  save us from these dungeons and them from 
disasters. Amen. 

                                                                                 H u s r e v 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers and Companions in Disaster! 
There  being  blessed  scholars,  good  organizers,  and  sincerely  devoted  students 
among you, I felt firmly confident that you would preserve your unity and solidarity in 
the  face  of  our  powerful,  cunning,  and  numerous  enemies.  I  felt  easy  and  was  not 
preoccupied  with  you.  But  it  has  now  become  necessary  to  explain  a  number  of 
matters. 

The First: I was not going to send anything to Ankara, lest it delay your release. 
But since the court mixed up the treatises that are confidential and those which are not 
and  the old letters and the  new, and sent them to Ankara, it was essential to send to 
those  departments  Müdafaat  Risalesi  (The  Defences),  which  supplies  extremely 
powerful replies concerning the confidential treatises, especially the Sufyan and Islamic 
Dajjal  (Antichrist)  in  the  Fifth  Ray,  and  The  Fruits  of  Belief,  which  smashes  the 
arrogant disbelief arising from Naturalist philosophy and its insolent attacks on belief, 
so  that  the  committee  of  experts  there  would  not  base  their  judgements  on  those 
confidential treatises and rule against us like the first committee. 

The Second Point: My Dear Brothers! While writing the reply to your important 
letter,  they  gave  me  the  same  letter.  I  had  begun  the  Second  Point  and  it  remained 
unfinished. Now I am completing it, so take note of it. If this idea is given currency by 
your useless lawyer, it is doubtless a plan of those who are seeking our conviction, so 
that  like the committee of experts here, the committe in Ankara will take as basic the 
unpublished  confidential  treatises,  and  especially  the  Fifth  Ray,  extend  them  to  the 
whole  Risale-i  Nur  then  confiscate  it,  and  inferring  that  the  matters  discussed  in  the 
Fifth  Ray  are  what  all  the  wretched  students  study  who  read  the  Risale-i  Nur,  have 
them  all  convicted  due  to  my  crime.  The  prison  governor  and  assistant  prosecutor’s 
making  difficulties  for  me  by  preventing  me  from  speaking  and  confiscating  what  I 
have written is a powerful  

 

351

sign that the intention is for Ankara to make the ruling against us before the irrefutable 
replies of the defences reach there. 

The  Third  Point:  In  fact,  the  Chairman  of  the  Court  said  that  day  that  he  was 
going  to  send  the  books,  documents,  and  defences  of  importance,  which  would 
prolong the case, to Ankara. These have certainly arrived by now. If my two well-set-
out  and  explicatory  defence  speeches  are  sent,  they  may  solve  the  case  quickly;  it 
would  not  be  prolonged  but  expedited,  and  those  with  families  released.  But  myself 
and those like me  who have no one, we should not be released, but remain in prison, 
for it is the best place to defend the truths of belief against the atheists and apostates. 

Fourth  Point:  If  the  Risale-i  Nur  is  not  acquitted  and  my  defence  is  not  taken 
into consideration, your apparent denial will not save you; because of its all being the 
same question, we are all bound together. Only a very few of our friends who have a 
slight  connection  might  be  saved.  Eskişehir  Court  demonstrated  this  in  fact.  For  the 
past  year  they  have  planted  spies  among  us  who  carefully  record  the  disclosures  of 
simple-minded  and  rash  students,  and  have  employed  every  means  to  wreck  us  and 
make us regret our way, and have even mobilized Shaykh Abdülhakim against us. But 
they  have  ruined  him  the  same  as  they  have  ruined  us  and  Shaykh  Abdülbaki  and 
Shaykh Süleyman, who has objected to me from time to time, so your denials to them 
and your running away will make absolutely no difference to what they think, and what 
they call “discretionary conviction,” just as it made no difference in Eskişehir. 

Fifth Point: We have understood certainly through our experiences of both here 
and Eskişehir that due to it all being the same case, our greatest need is for complete 
solidarity. Taking offence and being irritable and critical due to the hardships doubles 
the wretchedness of our plight. Regretably, it was you that I had the most confidence 
in and trusted most. Sometimes when I feel a twinge of anxiety, I think of Kamil Hoja 
and Siddik Hoja from Istanbul and the people in the province of Kastamonu who have 
displayed  an  extraordinary  loyalty,  and  my  anxiety  evaporates.  Be  careful  that  the 
secret organization that supports absolute disbelief does not infiltrate you. It infiltrated 
the  ward  next  to  me  and  caused  me  indescribable  torment.  Discuss  this  among 
yourselves  now  without  argument;  I  shall  accept  your  decision.  But  if  in  your 
discussions  you  take  into  consideration  the  possibility  that  if  my  defence  goes  to 
Ankara and is studied there the court here may come to a decision about those whose 
release  is  possible;  and  the  possibility  that  those  who  struggle  against  us,  and  exiled 
Abdülbaki,  Abdülhakim,  and Haji Süleyman, and made Yesil Semsi  remain here after 
he  had  been  officially  released,  will  not  release  those  like  Hafiz Mehmed  and  Seyyid 
Sefik, with their firm adherence to  

 

352

religion  and  refusal  to  bow  before  the  dead  leader  and  his  picture,  and  their 
demonstrating their lack of support for atheism and innovations. You should also take 
into  consideration  that  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  that  the  Risale-i  Nur emerges 
from  obscurity  and  in  a  momentous  general  question  at  a  time  they  are  contesting 
themselves  in  their  centres,  the  hesitant  and  bewildered  people  of  belief  can  find the 
students  behind  them  and  by  not  running  away  it  can  be  shown  to  them  that  the 
students are bound to an unshakeable and invincible truth. Beware! Take no notice of 
each  other’s  faults;  have  respect  instead  of  feeling  angry,  and  help  each  other  rather 
than being critical. 

My Dear, Loyal, Faithful Brothers! 
For  the  past  few days  I  have  changed  the  form  of  my  supplications.  I no longer 
say  “faithful”  in  the  phrase  “faithful  students  of  the  Risale-i  Nur”  when  repeating 
perhaps a hundred times “forgive us” or “give us success.” Then those of our brothers 
who  feel  themselves  obliged  to  act  as  though  they  have  dispensations,  or  due  to  the 
anxiety  and  despair  caused  by  distress,  act  contrarily  to  resolution  and  fidelity  by 
apparently denying or holding back, are not left out of those prayers. 

* * * 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear Brother Hafiz Ali!36 
Do  not  worry  about  your  illness.  My  Almighty  God  grant  you  healing.  Amen! 
You  are  making  a  high  profit  since  one  hour’s worship in prison is the equivalent of 
twelve hours’ worship. If you want some medicine, I have some here; I can send them 
to you. Anyway there is a slight illness doing the rounds. I am certain to be ill the day I 
attend the court. Perhaps you have taken on a little of my illness in order to help me, 
like  those  of  former  times  who  with  extraordinary  self-sacrifice,  were  ill  and  died  in 
each other’s places. 

                                             

36 Hafiz Ali: A leading Risale-i Nur student in the Isparta area. He was from the village of 

Islâmköy, many of whose inhabitants he led in serving the Risale-i Nur. He fell ill and died in Denizli 
Prison in 1944. 

 

353

[A perfectly apt obituary] 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 

Who say when afflicted by calamity: To God do we belong and to Him is our 
return.37 

I  offer  my  condolences  to  myself,  to  you,  and  to  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  I 
congratulate  Hafiz  Ali  and  the  Denizli  graveyard.  That  heroic  brother  of  ours  who 
knew with ‘knowledge of certainty’ the truths of The Fruits of Belief, has left his body 
behind  in  his  grave  to  ascend  to  the  stations  of  ‘vision  of  certainty’  and  ‘absolute 
certainty,’  to  journey  round  the  stars  and the world of spirits like the angels. Having 
carried out his duty to the letter, he has been discharged to take his rest. May the Most 
Merciful of the  Merciful write merits in the book of his good deeds to the number of 
the letters of the Risale-i Nur, both written and read. Amen! And may He pour down 
blessings onto his spirit to their number. Amen! And may He make the Qur’an and the 
Risale-i  Nur  pleasant,  friendly  companions  to  him  in  his  grave.  Amen!  And  may  He 
bestow  ten  heroes  to  take  his  place  in  the  Light  Factory,38  and  make  them  work. 
Amen. Amen. Amen. 

Remember  him  in  your  prayers  like  me.  I  beseech  Divine  mercy  that  a thousand 
tongues will be employed in place of his single tongue and he will gain a thousand lives 
in place of the single life and tongue he lost. 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Endless thanks be to the Most Merciful of the Merciful that in these extraordinary 
times and strange place, He permitted us by means of you to win the honour of being 
students  of the religious sciences and to perform important services. It has been seen 
on numerous occasions by those who divine the state of people in their graves that like 
martyrs,  in  their  graves,  some  enthusiastic  and  serious  students  of  the  religious 
sciences who die when busy with their studies suppose themselves to be alive and still 
studying.  Indeed,  while  observing  a  student  who  died  when  studying  grammar  and 
syntax, one such diviner of graves was curious what answer the student would give to 
Munkar  and  Nakir  in  his  grave,  and  he  heard  that  when  the  questioning  angel  asked 
him:  “Who  is  your  Sustainer?”,  the  student  replied:  “‘Who’  is  the  subject,  and ‘your 
Sustainer’ is its predicate.” He gave a grammatical answer, supposing himself to be in 
his medrese. Thus, like that incident, I know the late Hafiz Ali to be a student  

                                             

37 Qur’an, 2:156. 
38 That is, the village of Islâmköy. 

 

354

of the religious sciences working at the Risale-i Nur, the highest of the sciences, at the 
degree  of  martyrs  and  at  their  level  of  life.  With  that  conviction,  in  some  of  my 
supplications I pray for him, and like him for Mehmed Zühdü and Hafiz Mehmed: “O 
God! Busy them in perfect happiness and contentment till the resurrection of the dead 
with the truths of belief and mysteries of the Qur’an in the guise of the Risale-i Nur. 
Amen! 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear and Loyal Brothers! 
I cannot forget the late Hafiz Ali; his suffering upsets me terribly. In earlier times, 
self-sacrificing  persons  would  sometimes  die  in  place  of  their  friends;  I  reckon  he 
departed in my place. If those like you who follow his system were not performing his 
supreme service, it would have been a terrible loss for Islam. My pain subsides when I 
think of you, his heirs, and I feel cheered up. It is astonishing but his departing with his 
spiritual  life,  indeed,  with his  physical life, to the  Intermediate Realm, has aroused in 
me a longing to go to that world, and one veil more has been folded back in my spirit. 
Just as we send greetings to our brothers in Isparta from here and converse with them 
and  exchange  news,  so  the  Intermediate  Realm,  where  Hafiz  Ali  now  dwells,  has 
become like Isparta or Kastamonu in my view. I heard, even, that someone from here 
was sent there last night. I felt even sorrier; why had I not sent Hafiz Ali greetings with 
him? Then it occurred to me that no means are needed to send greetings; his powerful 
connection  is  like  a  telephone.  Also,  he  would  come  and  receive  them.  That  great 
martyr  has  caused  me  to  love  Denizli,  I  do  not  want  to  leave  here  now.  He  and 
Mehmed  Zühdü  and  Hafiz  Mehmed  are  continuing  their  tasks  serving  belief  and  the 
Risale-i Nur which they carried out in their lives. They watch from very close by, and 
even help. With their taking their places, due to the valuable service they performed, in 
the sphere of the great saints, I mention the names of those two, together with Hafiz 
Mehmed,  together  with  those  of  the  spiritual  poles  in  my  ‘chain,’  and  bequeath  my 
gifts. 

* * * 

My Dear and Loyal Brothers! 
Your  sincerity,  loyalty,  and  steadfastness  are  sufficient  reason  to  disregard  one 
another’s faults in the present trying circumstances, and to hide them. For the powerful 
brotherhood within the Risale-i Nur is such a good  

 

355

act it causes one to forgive a thousand evils. Since at the Last Judgement when good 
deeds  will  preponderate  over  evils,  Divine  justice  will  forgive,  you  too,  seeing  that 
good deeds preponderate, should act with love and forgiveness. For to become angry 
due  to  a  single  bad  deed,  and  exasperated  in  harmful  manner  out  of  irritability,  and 
upset because of the difficulties, is to be wrong in two respects. God willing, you will 
assist one another in joy and consolation, and will reduce the hardship to nothing. 

My Loyal, Blessed Brothers! 
The reason I have not spoken with you for a few days is a severe illness resulting 
from  poison,  the  like  of  which  I  have  never  experienced.  On  account  of  the  Risale-i 
Nur,  I  shall  be  proud  till  the  end  of  my  days  of  my  steadfast,  staunch,  unshakeable 
brothers in the ‘Light’ and ‘Rose’ areas,39 and the devoted brothers of Kastamonu, and 
I find them a powerful support and effective solace in the face of the afflictions of all 
the  tyrants.  If  I  was  to  die  now,  I  would meet my death happily seeing that they are 
there. 

The worldly cast me into prison due to their groundless fears that I was opposing 
them,  but  Divine  Determining  imprisoned  me  because I did not speak with them and 
did not try to reform them. If I remain in prison with only a few friends, I shall seek an 
open  trial  which  will  arouse  the  interest  of  all  the  Islamic  world,  and  I  shall  open 
proceedings  against  the  departments  of  government  in  Ankara,  and  have  numerous 
copies made in the new letters of  The Fruits of Belief and the defence speeches, and 
shall send them to the important departments, God willing. 

* * * 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Hadiths  of  this  sort  are  allegorical.  They  are  not  particular  and  do  not  look  to 
general places. As for others, of the religious differences that would afflict the Umma, 
they  point  out  a  single  time,  citing  the  Hijaz  and  Iraq  as  examples.  Anyway  in  the 
‘Abbasid period, numerous misguided sects came into being which harmed Islam, like 
the Mu‘tazila, the Rawafid, Jabriyya, and atheists and heretics under various guises. At 
a  time  there  were  serious  upheavals  regarding  the  Shari‘a  and  tenets  of  belief, 
numerous leading figures of Islam like Bukhari, Muslim, Imam-i A‘zam, Imam Shafi‘i, 
Imam  Malik,  Imam  Ahmad  ibn  Hanbal,  Imam  Ghazali,  Gawth  al-A‘zam,  and  Junayd 
al-Baghdadi, emerged and quelled the  

                                             

39 That is, Islâmköy (led by Hafiz Ali) and Isparta (led by Husrev) respectively. 

 

356

religious  dissension.  The  victory  continued  for  around  three  hundred  years,  but  the 
sects of the people of misguidance covertly, by way of politics, brought down on the 
Muslims  the  dissension  of  Hulagu  and  Jenghiz.  Both  Hadiths,  and  Imam  ‘Ali  (May 
God  be  pleased  with  him)  explicitly  indicate  this  dissension  together  with  its  date. 
Then  since  the  dissension  of  the  present  time  is  one  of  the  most  serious,  both 
numerous Hadiths, and numerous Qur’anic allusions give news of it, together with the 
date.  Making  an  analogy  with  this,  when  a  Hadith  mentions  in  general  fashion  the 
stages  the  Umma  will  pass  through,  it  sometimes  points  out  the  date  of  a  particular 
event  within  the  generality, by  way  of  an example. Various parts of the Risale-i Nur 
have made certain interpretations of allegorical Hadiths such as these, the meanings of 
which  are  not  completely  understood.  The  Twenty-Fourth  Word  and  Fifth  Ray 
elucidate this truth by means of principles. 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
It was imparted to me that I should explain a truth so that you do not accuse one 

another of egotism or disloyalty. 

At  one  time  I  observed  that  some of  the  great  saints  who  had  given up egotism 
and  none  of  whose  evil-commanding  souls  remained,  complained bitterly about them 
and  I  was  astonished.  I  later  understood  perfectly  that  on  the  death  of  the  evil-
commanding  soul,  its  implements  are  handed  over  to  veins  of  temperament  and 
emotions, so that the striving of the soul can continue to the end of the person’s life; 
and  the  exertion  does  continue.  Those  great  saints,  then,  complain  of  this  second 
enemy and heir of the soul. Moreover, spiritual worth, station, and virtue do not look 
to this world so that they should make themselves felt. In fact, since some of those at 
the  highest  station  do  not  perceive  the  great  Divine  favours  bestowed  on  them,  they 
consider  themselves  to  be  more  wretched  and  bankrupt  than  everyone,  which  shows 
that  the  wonder-workings,  unfoldings,  illuminations,  and  lights  which  the  mass  of 
people consider to be spiritual perfection, cannot be the means to and touchstone for 
that  spiritual  worth  and  those  stations.  This  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  although  one 
hour  of  the  Companions  of  the  Prophet  (PBUH)  had  the  worth  of  a  day  of  other 
saints,  or  perhaps  forty  days’  ordeal,  all  the  Companions  experienced  the  same 
wondrous illuminations and states as the saints. 

My  brothers,  be  careful!  Do  not  let  your  evil-commanding  souls  deceive  you  by 
comparing  others  to  yourselves  and  thinking  ill  of  them;  do  not  allow  them  to  make 
you doubt the Risale-i Nur’s ability to train. 

 

357

In His Name, be He glorified! 

[The unruly youths themselves confirm that nine slaps they received related to 
the five matters in the Risale-i Nur’s  Guide For  Youth and Fruits of Belief 
are a subtle instance of the Risale-i Nur’s wonder-working.] 

The First is Feyzi, who sometimes  assists me. At the start I told him: You have 
attended a reading of The Fruits, so don’t get into trouble. He did get into trouble, and 
received a slap: he could not use his hand for a week. 

                                                                                 Yes, it’s true, 
                                                                                      Feyzi 

The Second is Ali Riza, who assists me and writes out The Fruits. One day I was 
going  to  teach  him  about  what  he  had  written.  Out  of  laziness,  he  made  an  excuse 
about  cooking  the  food and did not come. He suddenly received a slap: although his 
saucepan was in good shape, the bottom suddenly fell out together with the food. 

                                                                                Yes, it’s true, 
                                                                                     Ali Riza 

The Third is Ziya. He wrote out the topics about youth and the obligatory prayers 
from  The  Fruits  for  himself,  and  began  to  perform  the  prayers.  But  then  he  became 
lazy and gave up praying and writing. He suddenly received a slap: for no reason and 
in  extraordinary  fashion,  his  basket  and  the  clothes  in  it,  which  were  beside  him, 
caught fire. No one among that crowd being aware of this until they had burnt shows 
that it was an intended ‘compassionate slap.’ 

                                                                                  Yes, it’s true, 
                                                                                         Ziya 

The Fourth is Mahmud. I  read him the topics about youth and the prayers from 
The Fruits and I told him not to gamble and to perform the prayers. He agreed. But he 
was overcome by laziness, and did not pray and did gamble. He suddenly received ‘an 
angry slap:’ while gambling, he lost three or four times, and despite his poverty, had to 
hand over forty liras, his sack coat and his trousers to his opponent, and he still has not 
come to his senses. 

                                                                                     Yes, it’s true, 
                                                                                           Mahmud 

The Fifth: A boy of fourteen called Süleyman was always causing  

 

358

trouble  and  at  the  same  time  egging  others  on.  I  told  him  to  behave  himself  and 
perform  the  prayers,  or  his  conduct  would  get  him  into  big  trouble and put him into 
danger. He began to perform the prayers, but then he gave them up and began making 
trouble again. He suddenly received a slap; he caught scabies and had to remain in bed 
for three weeks. 

                                                                                      Yes, it’s true, 
                                                                                          Süleyman 

The  Sixth  is  Ömer,  who  at  the  beginning  assisted  me;  he  began  to  perform  the 
prayers  and  gave  up  singing.  Then  one  evening,  a  song  reached  my  ears  which  was 
being sung close to my door; it disturbed me as I was reciting my supplications. I was 
angry,  went  out  and  saw  that  unusually,  it  was  Ömer.  And  unusually  for  me,  I  dealt 
him a slap. Then, unusually, the following morning, he was sent to another prison. 

The Seventh: A sixteen year old called Hamza, who because he had a good voice, 
used  to  sing  songs, also  whetting  the  appetites  of  others  and  upsetting  things.  I  told 
him not to do it or he would receive a slap. Then suddenly two days later his hand was 
dislocated and he suffered torments for two weeks. 

                                                                                   Yes, it’s true, 
                                                                                          Hamza 
There are other slaps like these, but the paper is finished and so is the meaning. 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
An education minister raised the veil from his face and revealed absolute disbelief 
in  another  guise.  He  must  have  written  that  manifesto  on  some  other  prompting, 
before receiving the defences we last sent. I was not thinking of sending them to that 
department, but this has shown that it is both appropriate and necessary to send them 
there too, with my brothers’ approval. For most likely a deputy so bigotted in atheism 
would  not  be  indifferent  towards  the  documents  and  confidential  treatises  sent  to 
Ankara. He was suddenly hit on the head by the irrefutable defences; it was excellent. 
God willing, it will give rise to a powerful movement in favour of the Risale-i Nur in 
that department too. 

My  Brothers!  Since  some  people  are  like  that,  to  submit  to  them  is  a  sort  of 
suicide; it is to regret Islam, or even to shake off religion. For they are so bigotted in 
atheism that they are not content with people like us  

 

359

only  submitting  or  pretending  to  submit;  they  tell  us:  “Give  up  your  hearts  and 
consciences,  and  work  for  this world alone.” In such a  situation, there is no solution 
other  than  relying  on  dominical  grace,  trusting  in  God  in  patience  and  fortitude, 
sending four crates of copies of the Risale-i Nur to that centre, and praying that with 
their  powerful  truths,  they  will  be  victorious.  Our  experience  up  to  now  has  shown 
that  avoiding one another and being upset, and dissociating  oneself from the Risale-i 
Nur, and submitting to them and even joining them, is of no benefit. Also, in no way be 
anxious.  That  deputy’s  blustering  alarm  shows  his  weakness  and  fear,  and  that  he  is 
compelled not to attack, but to defend himself. 

* * * 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Sami Bey told me that one of our brothers from Homa, a student called Ali, died 
around  the  same  time  as  Hafiz Ali. Mehmed Ali,  one of heroes of Homa, also wrote 
and told me. So in many of my prayers I have made that Ali a companion to the great 
martyr Ali. 

Recently, a lady who is connected with  us dreamt that three of our brothers had 
died.  Its  interpretation  is  that  these  two  Ali’s  and  Mustafa, who  in  prison  wanted  to 
become a follower of the Risale-i Nur and was hanged, went to the hereafter in place 
of all of us, and were sacrificed for our well-being. 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
My  Dear,  Loyal, Unshakeable  Brothers,  who  know  the  true  nature and meaning 

of reliance on God! 

Although for twenty years I have not had the curiosity to either read or ask about 
any newspaper, with much regret I today saw, only for the sake of some of our weak 
brothers, a newspaper article. I understood from it that covertly and openly a number 
of important movements are playing false parts. Since we appear in the public eye, it is 
supposed  we  are  connected  with  those  movements.  God  willing,  the  four  boxes  of 
powerful,  irrefutable  treatises  and  notebooks  of  decisive  defences  will  produce  good 
results for both us, and belief and the Qur’an, and Islam. We have not meddled in their 
worlds and they have in no way established that we are going to meddle. Ankara was 
compelled to request the whole Risale-i Nur in order to scrutinize it. 

 

360

Since  this  is  the  fact  and  since  up  to  now  in  the  service  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  we 
have  witnessed  the  manifestation  of  dominical  grace  to  an  undeniable  degree  —  we 
have all experienced this, particular and universal; and since many of the movements of 
politics  and  the  world  are  mustering  forces  against  each  other;  and  since  we  can  do 
nothing except be content with the Divine Decree and submit to Divine Determining, 
and  receive  the  vast and sacred consolation arising from the service of  belief and the 
Qur’an and the Risale-i Nur; certainly, what we have to do before anything else is not 
be  alarmed  and  not  to  despair  and  strengthen  each  other’s  morale  and  not  to  be 
frightened  and  to  meet  this  calamity  trusting  in  God,  and  recognize  the  mountains 
which  the  inane,  clamorous  journalists  who  make  mountains  out  of  molehills  to  be 
molehills, and to give them no importance. The life of this world, especially at this time 
and  under  these  conditions,  is  without  value.  Whatever  happens  to  one,  one  should 
meet it contentedly. 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Two or three of my brothers have a good way of consoling themselves. They say 

this:  

Some  of  our  new  brothers  in  this  prison  are  enduring  patiently  one  or  two  or 
perhaps ten years of this calamity because of one or two hours illicit activity. Some of 
them  even  offer  thanks,  saying  that  they  have  been  saved  from  other  sins.  They  say: 
Why should  we  complain  about  six  or  seven  months  of  beneficial hardship, since we 
are employed in the most licit activity and are serving belief through the Risale-i Nur? 
I  congratulate  them.  Yes,  to  suffer  difficulties  for  five  or  ten  months  because  of 
performing  for  five  or  ten  years  an  enjoyable, pleasant, beneficial, sacred service and 
elevated worship and reflection with the intention of saving both one’s own belief and 
that  of others, is a cause of pride and thanks. In a Hadith it says: “For one person to 
come  to  believe  through  you  is  better  for  you  than  a  plainful  of  red  sheep  and 
goats.”40You should think therefore of all the people here, in the court, and in Ankara, 
whose  belief  has  been  saved,  and  will  be  saved,  from  ghastly  doubts  through  your 
writings and your service, and offer thanks in patience and with resignation. 
If the Republican People’s Party, which governs in Ankara, obsti 

                                             

359, No: 9609. 

40 Bukhari, Jihad, 102; Abu Da’ud, ‘Ilm, 10; Darimi, ‘IIm, 10; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, vi, 

 

361

nately  opposes  the  powerful  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  which  go  there,  and  does  not 
attempt  to  protect  it  with  the  intention  of  being  conciliatory,    the  most  comfortable 
place  for  us  is  prison.  It  is  a  sign  that  the  atheists  have  combined  communism  and 
atheism, and the Government is obliged to heed them. In which case, the Risale-i Nur 
would draw back and halt, and calamities, material and immaterial, would begin their 
onslaught. 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
O  assembly  of  jinns  and  men!  Came  there  not  unto  you  messengers  from 
among you?41 

[Although  these  verses  state  that  prophets  were  sent  from  the  jinns,  the 
following is Üstad’s answer to a question aimed at solving this difficulty.] 

My Dear Brothers!  
Truly this question of yours holds much importance, but since the Risale-i Nur’s 
chief  function  is  saving  mankind  from  misguidance  and  absolute  disbelief,  it  has  no 
place for matters of this sort and does not discuss them. The leading figures of the first 
generations  of  Islam  also  did  not  discuss  them  much.  For  such  unseen,  invisible 
matters  are  open  to  exploitation.  Fraudulent  persons  also  may  exploit  them  for  their 
own  ends,  just  as  spiritualists  nowadays  perform  their  charlatanry  under  the name of 
‘calling up spirits [jinns].’ It should not be much discussed therefore since they exploit 
it  to  harm  religion.  Also,  no  prophets have been sent  from the jinns after the Seal of 
the Prophets (PBUH). Also, the Risale-i Nur has tried to prove the existence of jinns 
and  spirit  beings  with  incontrovertible  proofs  in  order  to  refute  the  ideas  of 
materialism,  which  plagues  humanity  at this time.  It  has put the matter in third place 
and  has  left  detailed  discussion  of  it  to  others.  God willing, a student of the Risale-i 
Nur may expound Sura al-Rahman in the future and solve the question. 

                                             

41 Qur’an, 6:130. 

 

362

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 

Who  say  when  afflicted  by  calamity:  To  God  do  we  belong,  and  to  Him  is 
our return.42  

The  deaths  of  Hafiz  Ali,  Hafiz  Mehmed,  and  Mehmed  Zühdü  were  truly a great 
loss  not only for us, but for Isparta, and even for this country and the Islamic world. 
But  up  to  now,  as  a  manifestation  of  Divine  grace,  whenever  a  Risale-i  Nur student 
has been lost, two or three have immediately appeared who follow the same system. I 
have  powerful  hopes  therefore  that  serious  students  will  emerge  who  will  carry  out 
those students’ duties in another form. Anyway, those three blessed people performed 
a hundred years’ worth of duties serving the cause of belief in a short period. May the 
Most  Merciful  of  the  Merciful  grant  them  mercy  to  the  number  of  the  letters  of the 
Risale-i Nur that they wrote, published, and read. Amen! 

Offer my condolences to Hafiz Mehmed’s relations and his blessed village for me. 
I  have  made  him  the  companion  to  Hafiz  Ali  and  Mehmed  Zühdü,  and  included the 
names  of  the  three  of  them  among  the  names  of  those  of  my  masters  who  were 
spiritual poles. And I have made Hafiz Akif the companion of Asim and Lütfi. 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
In  accordance  with  an  inner  meaning  of  “Good  is  in  what  God  chooses,”  it  is 
good  this  matter  of  ours  has  been  delayed.  For  love  of  that  dreadful  dead  man  was 
being  inculcated  in  all  the  schools,  government  departments,  and  in  the  people.  This 
situation  would  have  had  a  grievous  and  painful  effect  on  the  Islamic  world  and the 
future. The Risale-i Nur, which demonstrates with decisive proofs his true nature, now 
passing —outside our wills— into the hands of those at the top and those most closely 
connected with him and those who would be last to give him up, and its being carefully 
and curiously studied, is such an event that if thousands of people like us were to be 
sent  to  prison,  and  even  to  be  executed,  it  would  still  be  cheap  with  regard  to  the 
religion of Islam. At the very least, it will save to a degree the most obdurate of them 
from absolute disbelief and apostasy, lead them into ‘doubting’ disbelief, and moderate 
their arrogant and insolent aggression. We have claimed with the final  

                                             

42 Qur’an, 2:156. 

 

363

words  we  said  to  their  faces  in  court,  “Let  our  heads  too  be  sacrificed  for  a  sacred 
truth for which millions of heroic heads have been sacrificed!”, that we shall hold out 
to the very end. This cause may not be renounced. I hope that there is no one among 
you who would give it up. Since you have patiently endured it up to now, say: “Our 
fates and duties have not yet been fulfilled,” and continue to endure it. Certainly, they 
will  not  obstinately  oppose  the  Risale-i  Nur  in  order  to  defend  their  way,  which  is 
undeniably  proved  in  The  Fruits  to  consist  of  eternal  annihilation  and  everlasting 
solitary confinement; they will rather seek ways of coming to terms or making a truce. 
Patience is the key to happiness and joy.43 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
In the First Ray, the allusions have been elucidated of the verse, 

Can  he  who  was  dead,  to  whom  We  gave  life,  and  a  light  whereby  he  can 
walk amongst men...?44 

to  both  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  with  the  word  dead,  with  three  powerful  signs  and 
connections, to these unhappy Risale-i Nur students. Now, in the present events, one 
of  those  signs  is  being  realized.  For,  holding  up  life,  civilization,  and  pleasure,  those 
who  oppress  us  accuse  us  of  giving  no  importance  to  that  style  of  life;  they  make 
charges  against  us,  and  even  want  to  have  us  imprisoned  with  heavy  labour,  or 
executed. But they can find no legal sanction for this. As for us, we hold up death, the 
introduction  to  eternal  life  and  its  veil,  and  hit  them  over  the  heads  with  it  to  bring 
them to their senses, and work with all our strength to save them from true conviction, 
eternal execution, and everlasting solitary confinement. Even if I am given the severest 
penalties  because  of  the  vehement treatises that were sent to Ankara, and those who 
mete  out  the  penalties  are  saved  through  the  treatises  from  the  execution  of  death, 
both my heart and my soul would consent to it. That is to say, we want them to have 
life in both worlds and this is what we are seeking, while they want us to die and they 
are seeking pretexts for this. But we are not defeated before them, because the reality 
of death and thirty thousand human corpses daily display as clearly and visibly as the 
sun  the  proclamations  and  decrees  for  thirty  thousand  eternal  executions  and  thirty 
thousand solitary confinements for the people of misguidance. Let them do what they 
want.  

                                             

43 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, vi, 298; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa, ii, 22. 
44 Qur’an, 6:122. 

 

364

According to jafr and abjad reckoning, the verse,  

It is the fellowship of God that must triumph45  

has given us the good news, even in the twelve years of our most bitter defeat, of our 
victory  together  with  its  date.  Since  the  reality  is  this, we shall from now on say the 
following, both to the court, and to the people: 

We  are  trying  to  be  saved  from  death’s  eternal  execution,  which  awaits  us  ever 
before  our  eyes,  and  from the everlasting darkness of the solitary  confinement of the 
grave, which opens its door to us and summons us ineluctably. We are helping you to 
be  saved  from  that  awesome,  inevitable  calamity.  The  questions  of  politics  and  this 
world, which in your view are the most momentous, in our view and in that of reality 
have  little  value,  and  for those  not  directly  concerned, are meaningless, unimportant, 
and worthless. Whereas the essential human duties with which we are occupied have a 
genuine connection with everyone all the time. Those who do not like this task of ours 
and want to put a stop to it, should put a stop to death and shut up the grave!  

The third and fourth points have not been written for now. 
* * * 
In His Name, be He glorified! 
It is one of the wonders of the Risale-i Nur that for ten years Üstad Bediuzzaman 
has repeatedly said: “Atheists and apostates! Don’t interfere with the Risale-i Nur! It 
is a means of repulsing disasters, like almsgiving, so attacks on it, or its ceasing from 
activity,  weakens  its  defence  against  disaster. If you molest it, the calamities that are 
waiting in  the  offing  will  rain  down  on  you  in  floods.” There are numerous disasters 
we have witnessed in this connection. Whenever in the past four years the Risale-i Nur 
and its students have been attacked, a disaster or calamity has followed, demonstrating 
the Risale-i Nur’s importance and that it is a means of repulsing disaster. Among the 
hundreds  of  events  Bediuzzaman  predicted  through  the  Risale-i  Nur,  disasters  have 
put  their  signatures  to  their  correctness  with  the  hand  of  earthquakes;  the  four 
disasters  which  followed  them  showed  how  that  the  Risale-i  Nur  is  a  means  of 
repulsing  calamities.  May  Almighty  God  bestow  belief  on  the  hearts  of  those  who 
attack  us  and  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  minds  and  eyes  in  their  heads  that  will  see  the 
truth; and may He save us from these dungeons and them from those disasters. Amen! 

                                                                            H u s r e v 

                                             

45 Qur’an, 5:56. 

 

365

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers!  
It  is  a  manifestation  of  dominical  grace  that  while  expecting  the  Education 
Minister  to  erupt  and  attack  us,  although  he  had  not  seen  our  defences,  documents, 
and  books,  and  had  only  sensed  them;  and  although  the  highest  government 
departments  had  studied  our  most  vehement  confidential  treatises  like  the  Fifth  Ray 
and  Addendum  to  The  Six  Attacks  (Hücumat-i  Sitte’nin  Zeyli)  in  order  to  criticize 
them;  and  our  defences’  bold,  harsh  and  serious  blows  at  absolute  disbelief  should 
have  led  Ankara  to  act  severely  against  us;  they  adopted  a  very  lenient,  and  even 
conciliatory,  position  relative  to  the  importance  of  the  question.  One  reason  for  this 
manifestation  of  Divine  grace  is  this:  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  being  read  with  care  and 
attention  in  all  the  country,  which  as  a  result  of  the  interest  has  become  a  large 
dershane or place of study, and by all the important departments of government. Yes, 
such  elevated  teachings  being  studied  at  this  time  on  such  a  comprehensive  and 
universal scale is certainly a significant instance of Divine favour and is a powerful sign 
that it has smashed absolute disbelief. 

My Brothers! Supposing that there may be an excuse for some weak family men 
who have suffered much hardship and loss to withdraw a little from the Risale-i Nur 
and  from  us,  or  even  to  give  us  up,  I  say  in  consequence  of  the  possibility  that they 
may change after having been released: it would be a serious loss for those who have 
paid this price, material and non-material, for goods of such value, and have suffered 
much  torment,  to  forgo  those  goods.  And  if  they  suddenly  give  up  the  Risale-i  Nur 
and its parts, and their attachment to it, and stop protecting us and helping and serving 
us,  it  would  be  an  unnecessary  loss  both  for  them  and  for  us.  For  this  reason,  in 
addition to being cautious, it is necessary not to change their loyalty, ties, and service. 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
It is a manifestation of dominical favour and instance of Divine preservation that 
as I have heard, the experts’ committee in Ankara has been defeated in the face of the 
Risale-i  Nur’s  truths,  and  while  there  are  numerous  reasons  for  its  criticizing  it  and 
objecting  to  it  strongly,  it  has  quite  simply  supplied  the  decision  for  its  acquittal. 
However, the harsh expressions in the confidential treatises and the challenging words 
in the  

 

366

defences,  and  the  fiery  attacks  of  the  Education  Minister,  and  there  being  two 
materialist  philosophers  attached  to  the  Ministry  of  Education  on  the  experts’ 
committee and a prominent scholar who supports the new measures, and for the past 
year  a  covert  atheistic organization has been inciting the People’s Party and Ministry 
of Education against us, all led us to expect violent objections and crushing penalties 
from the experts’ committee. But then the preservation and grace of the Most Merciful 
came  to  our  assistance,  and  pointing  out  to  them  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  high  station, 
induced  them  to  forgo  their  violent  criticisms.  Even,  with  the  idea of saving us from 
being convicted, and so that, because of the Eskişehir affair and famous Thirty-First of 
March  Incident  I  should  not  be  regarded  as  having  been  previously  convicted  of 
political  crimes,  and  show  that  we  act  solely  for  religion  and  belief  and  have  no 
political aims, they said: “Said Nursi has long claimed to be an heir of the Prophet. He 
adopts  the  position  of  a  regenerator  in  serving  the  Qur’an  and  belief;  that  is,  he  is 
sometimes  overcome  by  a  sort  of  ecstasy,  and  gets  carried away.” With this passage 
and  the  irreligious  expressions  of  the  philosophers,  they  are  saying  to  those  who 
support  religion,  whoever  they  are:  he  is  carrying  out  this  duty,  having  inherited  it 
from the regenerators of religion. They have used those irreligious philosophical terms 
in order to both criticize the excessively good opinions of me of some of our brothers, 
which  are  higher  than  my  due;  and  by  calling  me  an  ecstatic,  together  with  my 
vehemence, to exonerate me from political involvement and being convicted of it; and 
to  flatter  to  an  extent  those  who  object  to  us  and  are  hostile;  and  to  show  that  the 
Qur’anic allusions, and wondrous indications of Imam ‘Ali, and the truths of Gawth al-
A‘zam,  are  all  powerful;  and  to  smash  the  ambition,  egotism,  and  conceit  which  by 
comparison with others they reckon is certainly present in me. From beginning to end, 
the Risale-i Nur furnishes a reply to those words as brilliant as the sun. And since our 
way is brotherhood and the giving up of egotism, and since we have not made any self-
advertising  ecstatic utterances, the New Said’s humble life in the time  of the Risale-i 
Nur and his disregarding the excessively good opinions of him of his blessed brothers 
and moderating them with his instruction, completely refute the implications of those 
expressions, and dismiss them. 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers!  
I  am  not  sending  you  the  committee  of  experts’  unanimous  decisions  for  the 
moment  so  that  no  harm  comes  to  those  who  informed  on  us.  This  last  experts’ 
committee has evidently done all it can to save us and preserve us from the evil of the 
people of misguidance and innovation, and  

 

367

they 

inferred  about 

the  confidential 

treatises,  which 

has exonerated us from all the charges made against us. They give the feeling that they 
have grasped thoroughly what the Risale-i Nur teaches, and have unanimously decided 
that the greater part of its scholarly parts about belief are written knowledgeably, that 
Said explains his views both sincerely and seriously, and that the power and strength in 
it  are  not  to  contest  the  government,  but  only  to  teach  the  needy  the  truths  of  the 
Qur’an.  And 
they  call 
“unscholarly:” “He sometimes goes into ecstasy and suffers emotional disturbance and 
mental  storms,  and  should  not  therefore  be  held  responsible.”  And  concerning  the 
terms  “the  Old  Said”  and  “the  New  Said,”  they  said  there  are  two  personalities, and 
inferred that in the second are an extraordinary strength of belief and knowledge of the 
Qur’anic truths, and for the sake of the philosophers said that “there is the possibility 
of  a  sort  of  ecstasy  and  mental  disturbance,”  while  to  save  us  from  being  charged 
concerning  a  certain  violence  of  expression  and  to  flatter  our  opponents,  they  said: 
“the possibility may be noted of an illness affecting hearing and sight which results in 
hallucinations.” The treatises of the Risale-i Nur, which are superior to other products 
of  the  mind,  form  sufficient  answer  to  the  suggestion  of  this  possibility,  refuting  it 
totally.  They  have  these  in  their  possession,  and  the  treatises  containing  the  defence 
speeches and The Fruits of Belief, which have left all the lawyers in amazement. I offer 
many  thanks  that due to this possibility the allusion of a Hadith was imparted to me. 
Also,  the  experts’  committee  have  completely  acquitted  all  my  brothers  and  myself. 
They said, “They adhere to Said’s scholarly and knowledgeable works for their belief 
and  their  lives  in  the  hereafter;  we  found  nothing  explicit  or  implicit  in  either  their 
correspondence, or their books or treatises, suggesting any sort of conspiracy against 
the  government.”  They  gave  their  decision  unanimously,  and  put  their  signatures, 
philosopher Necati, (scholar) Yusuf Ziya, and philosopher Yusuf. 

It is a subtle coincidence that while for ourselves, we call this prison a School of 
Joseph  (Medrese-i  Yusufiye)  and  The  Fruits  of  Belief,  its  fruit,  these  two  other 
Yusuf’s have said secretly through their tongues of disposition “we also have shared in 
the  lessons  of  that  School  of  Joseph.”  Moreover,  their  subtle  evidence  for  the 
possibility of ecstasy and hallucinations are phrases like “The Thirty-Third Word” and 
“The Thirty-Third Letter Containing Thirty-Three Windows,” and “his hearing his cat 
reciting the Divine Names ‘Ya Rahim! Ya Rahim! (O Most Compassionate One!’,” and 
“his seeing himself as a gravestone.” 

                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i 

 

368

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Since according to numerous signs, we are under Divine protection, and since in 
the face of numerous inequitable enemies, the Risale-i Nur has not been defeated, and 
has  silenced  to  a  degree  the  Education  Minister  and  People’s  Party,  and  since  those 
who,  greatly exaggerating the extent and breadth of our question, have caused alarm 
to  the  Government  are  sure  to  try  to  conceal  their  slander  and  lies  with  various 
trumped  up  excuses;  what  we  must  do  is  to  retain  our  patience  and  composure  in 
perfect submission, and particularly not to feel disillusioned, and not to despair when 
sometimes  the  opposite  of  what  we  hoped  occurs,  and  not  to  be  shaken  by  passing 
storms!  Yes,  disillusionment  may  destroy  the  morale  and  enthusiasm  of  the  worldly, 
but for the Risale-i Nur students, who see beneath the hardship, striving and distress, 
the  favours  of  Divine  mercy,  disillusionment  is  necessary  to  strengthen  their  efforts, 
their  progress,  and  their  seriousness.  Forty  years  ago  the  politicians  sent  me  to  a 
lunatic  asylum  saying  I  was  suffering  from  a  temporary  madness.  I  told  them:  I 
consider most of what you call sanity to be insanity; I resign from that sort of sanity. I 
observe in you the rule, “Everyone is mad, but their madness differs according to their 
caprices.” Now with the idea of saving myself and my brothers from serious charges, I 
repeat the same words to those who ascribe occasional ecstasy or a temporary insanity 
to me because of the confidential treatise, and I am grateful in two respects: 

The First: In a sound Hadith, it says: “The ordinary people deeming, because they 
are  beyond  their  understanding,  the  elevated  states  of  one  who  has  attained  perfect 
belief to be madness, point to the perfection of his belief.”46 

The Second Respect: I would agree with complete pride and joy, not only to be 
called  mad,  but  to  sacrifice  my  mind  completely,  and  my  life,  for  the  well-being  and 
salvation of my brothers in this prison and for them to be delivered from darkness. If 
you think it suitable, even, let someone write a letter of thanks to those three persons, 
and tell them that we are allowing them to share in our spiritual gains. 

                                             

46 Musnad, iii, 86; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, i, 499. 

 

369

My  Dear,  Loyal  Brothers,  and  Sincere  Friends  in  the  Service  of  the  Qur’an  and 
Belief,  and  My  Inseparable  Companions  on  the  Way  of  Truth  and  Reality  and  the 
Intermediate Realm and the Hereafter! 

With the time drawing close for us to part from one another, because of the faults 
and tensions arising from annoyances, the principles of the Treatise On Sincerity have 
not  been  preserved.  It  is  therefore  absolutely  essential that  you  wholely  forgive  each 
other. You are brothers closer to each other than the most devoted blood brother, and 
a brother conceals his brother’s faults, and forgives and forgets. I do not attribute your 
uncustomary  differences  and  egotism  here  to  your  evil-commanding  souls,  and  I 
cannot  reconcile it with the Risale-i  Nur students; I rather consider it to be a sort of 
temporary  egotism  found  even  in  saints  who  have  given  up  their  souls.  So  on  your 
part,  do  not  spoil  my  good  opinion  through  obstinacy,  and  make  peace  with  each 
other. 

* * * 

My Brothers! 
It  is  understood  from  the  report  of  the  experts’  committee  that the Risale-i Nur 
defeats  all 
the  groups  opposing  us,  for  by  repeating  The  Eloquent  Proof 
(Hüccetullahü’l-Bâliga), and the Treatise For The Elderly and Treatise On Sincerity, 
they  are  attracting  attention  to  them.  Moreover,  the  purpose  of  their  extremely 
superficial  and  pseudo-bigotted  hoja-like  criticisms,  the  answers  to  which  are  quite 
plain;  and  their  saying,  without  grasping  which  matters  are  completely  unrelated  and 
which are in truth conformable, that “there is a contradiction between them;” and their 
unhesitatingly  affirming  and  appreciating  ninety  per  cent  of  the  treatises  despite  the 
vehement  refutations  in  the  addendum  to  The  Six  Attacks  (Hücumat-i Sitte) of those 
who  have  issued  the  fatwas  for  the  innovations,  and  the  attacks  on  them,  is  only  to 
justify  themselves.  Moreover,  their  sufficing  with  pointing  out  that  my  saying  that 
persecuted,  religious  Christians  who  are  killed  by  the  enemies  of  religion  may  at the 
end of  time be sorts of martyrs is contradictory to the Addendum’s severe attacks on 
performing the prayers with uncovered head and making the call to prayer in Turkish, 
gives  one  the  conviction  that  they  have  most definitely been defeated by the Risale-i 
Nur. 

                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i  
 
 

 

370

 

370

The Fourteenth Ray 

A Short Addendum to My Statement 

I say this to Afyon Court: 
As is said in my statement, which has been presented to you and been put before 
the  law  and  its  justice:  to  raid  my  house  three  times  illegally,  summon  me  for 
questioning,  and  arrest  me  has  violated  the  dignity  of  three  high  courts  and  cast 
aspersions  on  their  justice,  indeed insulted it. For three courts and three ‘committees 
of  experts’  have  scrutinized  closely  over  two  years  my  books  and  letters  of  twenty 
years,  and  both  we  have  been  acquitted,  and  our  books  and  letters  returned. 
Moreover, living in complete seclusion under the most rigorous surveillance for three 
years after having been acquitted, I was able to write only one harmless letter a week 
to some of my friends. It was as though all my relations with the world had been cut, 
for  although I had been given my freedom, I could not  return to my native region. It 
tramples the honour of those three courts to bring up the same question again now, as 
though  completely  disregarding  their  just  decisions.  I  make  a  plea  to  your  court  to 
preserve the honour of those courts, which acted justly towards me. You should find 
some  matter  with  which  to  blame  me  other  than  “the  Risale-i  Nur,”  “organizing  a 
political  society,”  “founding  a  sufi  order,”  and  “the  possibility  of  breaching  security 
and  disturbing public  order,”  for they constitute the same case! I have many faults. I 
have decided to help you concerning my blameworthiness, for I have suffered far more 
outside  prison  than  inside  it.  I  would  find  more  comfort  now  in  either  the  grave  or 
prison.  Truly  I  am  fed  up with life. Enough now of these twenty years of torment in 
solitary confinement, intolerable surveillance and humiliation. It will  

 

371

provoke  Divine  wrath.  It  will  put  this  country  to  shame.  I  am  reminding  you.  Our 
firmest refuge and shield is: 

For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs.1 * God suffices 
me, there is no god but He; in Him do I place my trust — He the Sustainer of 
the Throne [of Glory] Supreme!2 

* * * 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
And from Him do we seek help 

 [This petition, which after eighteen years’ silence I am compelled to present 
to  the  court  and  a  copy  of  which  I  am  sending  to  Ankara,  comprises  my 
written  objections  concerning  the  indictment,  which  I  am  obliged  to  put 
forward.] 

This is a summary of a short defence speech: it should be known that it is exactly 
what I twice told the public prosecutor and police inspector, and on the third occasion 
the police chief and six or seven inspectors and police, who three times came to search 
my  house  in  Kastamonu;  and  what  I  said  in  reply  to  the  questions  of  the  public 
prosecutor in Isparta, and the Courts of Denizli and Afyon. It is like this: 

I told them: I have been living alone for eighteen to twenty years. I lived for eight 
years  in  Kastamonu opposite the police station, and in other places for twenty years, 
under  constant  surveillance  and  supervision,  and  the  place  where  I  was  staying  was 
searched on several occasions, but not the slightest hint or sign of anything related to 
this world or politics was  found. If  there had been anything irregular on my part and 
the police and judiciary did not know, or they did know but ignored it, then surely they 
are answerable to a greater extent than me. And if not, why, although nowhere in the 
world recluses are bothered who are preoccupied with their lives of the hereafter, do 
you bother me unnecessarily to this extent, to the detriment of the country and nation? 
We  students  of  the  Risale-i  Nur do not make the Risale-i Nur  a tool of worldly 
currents,  nor  even  of  the  whole  universe.  Furthermore, the Qur’an severely prohibits 
us from politics. For the Risale-i Nur’s duty is to serve the Qur’an through the truths 
of belief and through extremely  

                                             

1 Qur’an, 3:173. 
2 Qur’an, 9:129. 

 

372

powerful and decisive proofs, which in the face of absolute unbelief —which destroys 
eternal  life  and  also  transforms  the  life  of  this  world  into  a  ghastly  poison—  induce 
even  the  most  obdurate  atheist  philosophers  to  believe.  Therefore  we  may  not  make 
the Risale-i Nur a tool of anything. 

Firstly:  In  order  not  to  reduce  to  the value of fragments of glass in the view of 
the heedless, the diamond-like truths of the Qur’an by giving the false idea of political 
propaganda, and not to betray those precious truths.  

Secondly:  Compassion,  truth  and  right, and conscience, the fundamental way of 
the Risale-i Nur, severely prohibit us from politics and from interfering in government. 
For  dependent  on  one  or  two  irreligious  people  fallen  into  absolute  unbelief  and 
deserving of slaps and calamities are seven or eight innocents — children, the sick and 
the  elderly.  If  slaps  and  calamities  are  visited  on  the  one  or  two,  those  unfortunates 
suffer  also.  Therefore,  since  the  result  is  doubtful,  we  have  been  severely  prohibited 
from interfering in the life of society by way of politics, to the harm of government and 
public order. 

Thirdly:  Five  principles  are  necessary,  essential,  at  this  strange  time  in  order  to 
save  the  social  life  of  this  country  and  nation  from  anarchy:  respect,  compassion, 
refraining from what is prohibited (haram), security, the giving up of lawlessness and 
being obedient to authority. The evidence that when the Risale-i Nur looks to the life 
of society it establishes and strengthens these five principles in a powerful and sacred 
fashion and preserves the foundation-stone of public order, is that over the last twenty 
years the Risale-i Nur has made one hundred thousand people into harmless, beneficial 
members of this nation and country. The provinces of Isparta and Kastamonu testify to 
this. This means that knowingly or unknowingly the great majority of those who try to 
hamper the Risale-i Nur are betraying the country and nation and dominance of Islam 
on account of anarchy. The great good and benefit for this country of the one hundred 
and  thirty  treatises  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  cannot  be  refuted  by  the  imaginary  harms  of 
two or three of its parts, which are fancied to be harmful in the superficial view of the 
deluded  heedless.  Anyone  who  refutes  the  former  with  the  latter  is  an  exceedingly 
unfair and tyrannical. 

As for my own unimportant personal faults, I am unwillingly obliged to say, this: I 
am  someone  who  has  lived  alone  and  in  solitude  in  an  exile  resembling  solitary 
confinement. During that time I have not gone once of my own will to the market and 
well-attended  mosques.  Despite  suffering  much  persecution  and  distress,  I  have  not 
once  applied  to  the Government  for  my  own  comfort,  unlike  all  my  fellow exiles. In 
twenty years have not read a single newspaper, nor listened to one, nor been curious  

 

373

about one. As is testified to by all my close friends and those I met with, for a full two 
years in Kastamonu and seven years in other places I knew nothing of the conflicts and 
wars  in  the  world,  and  whether  or  not  peace  had  been  declared,  or  who  else  was 
involved in the fighting,  and  was not curious about it  and  did not ask, and for nearly 
three  years  did  not  listen  to  the  radio  that  was  playing  close  by  to  me.  But  I 
triumphantly  confronted  with  the  Risale-i  Nur  absolute  unbelief,  which  destroys 
eternal  life  and  transforms  the  life  of  this  world  even  into  compounded  pain  and 
suffering;  and  with  the  Risale-i  Nur,  which  issued  from  the  Qur’an,  have  saved  the 
belief  of  a  hundred  thousand  such  people,  as  has  been  attested  by  them,  and  for  a 
hundred  thousand  people  have  transformed  death  into discharge  papers.  Is  there  any 
law demanding that such a person is harassed to this degree, and made to despair, and 
by making him weep to make hundreds of thousands of those innocent brothers of his 
weep too? What advantage is there in it? Is it not unprecedented tyranny in the name 
of justice? Is it not an unprecedented miscarriage of justice on account of the law? 

If you accuse me like some of the officials who searched my house, saying: “You 

and one or two of your treatises oppose the regime and our principles...” 

T h e  A n s w e r , Firstly: These new principles of yours have absolutely no right 

to enter the retreats of recluses. 

Secondly:  To  reject  something  is  one  thing,  not  to  accept  it  wholeheartedly  is 
something else, and not to act in accordance with it is something quite else. Those in 
authority  look  to  the  hand,  not  to  the  heart.  All  governments  have  vehement 
opponents who do not interfere in government and public order. In fact, the Christians 
who  were  under  the  Caliph  ‘Umar’s  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him)  rule  were  not 
interfered  with  although  they  rejected  the  law  of  the  Shari‘a  and  the  Qur’an. 
According to the principles of freedom of thought and conscience, so long as they do 
not  upset  the  government,  if  some  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  do  not  accept  the 
regime  and  your  principles  on  scholarly  grounds  and  act  in  opposition  to  them,  and 
even if they are inimical to the regime’s chief, they may not be touched legally. As for 
the  treatises,  I  said  they  were  confidential and prevented their publication. In fact, in 
regard to the treatise that was the cause of this affair, only once or twice in eight years 
in Kastamonu did someone bring me a copy. The same day I put it away somewhere. 
Now you are forcibly publicizing it, and it has become famous. 

It  is  well-known  that  if  there  is  some  fault  in  a  letter,  only  the  faulty  words are 

censored, and the rest are permitted. As a result of the four  

 

374

months  of  close  investigation  in  Eskişehir  Court,  only fifteen  words  were  found  in  a 
hundred treatises of the Risale-i Nur that were the cause of criticism, and now on only 
two  pages  of  the  four-hundred-page  Zülfikâr  are  explanations  of  Qur’anic  verses 
about  inheritance  and  the  veiling  of women, which were written thirty years ago and 
do  not  now  conform  to  the  Civil  Code.  This  proves  decisively  that  they  have  no 
worldly aim, and everyone is in need of them. The four-hundred-page Zülfikâr, which 
everyone has need of, may not be confiscated because of two pages. Those two pages 
should be excised and the collection returned to us; it is our right that it is returned. 

If  you  say  like  those  who  suppose  irreligion  to  be  politics  of  a  sort  and  in  this 
episode  have  said:  “You  are  spoiling  our  civilization  and  our  pleasure  with  these 
treatises of yours...” 

I reply: It is a universal principle accepted worldwide that no nation can continue 
in  existence  without  religion.  Particularly  if  it  is  absolute  unbelief,  it  gives  rise  to 
torments  more  grievous  in  this  world  than  Hell,  as  has  been  proved  with  complete 
certainty in A Guide For Youth. That treatise has now been printed officially. If, God 
forbid,  a  Muslim  apostasizes,  he  falls  into  absolute  disbelief;  he  cannot  remain  in  a 
state of ‘doubting unbelief,’ which keeps him alive to an extent. He also cannot be like 
irreligious  Europeans.  And  in  respect  of  the  pleasure  of  life,  he  falls  infinitely  lower 
than  the  animals,  for  they  have  no  sense  of  the  past  and  future.  Because  of  his 
misguidance, the deaths of all past and future beings, and his being eternally separated 
from them, overwhelm his heart with continuous pain. If belief enters his heart and he 
comes  to  believe,  those  innumerable  friends  are  suddenly  raised  to  life.  They  say 
through  the  tongue  of  disposition:  “We  did  not  die  and  we  were  not  annihilated,” 
transforming  his  hellish  state  into  Paradise-like  pleasure.  Since  the  reality  is  this,  I 
warn  you:  do  not  contest  the  Risale-i  Nur,  for  it  relies  on  the  Qur’an.  It  cannot  be 
defeated.  It  would  be  most regretable  for  this  country.3  It  would go somewhere else 
and illuminate there. Also, if I had heads to the number of the hairs on it and every day 
one was cut off, I would not bow this head, which is devoted to the Qur’an, to atheism 
and absolute disbelief, I would not and could not give up this service of belief and the 
Risale-i Nur. 

Certainly,  any  faults  in  the  statement  of  someone  who  has  been  a  recluse  for 
twenty years will be disregarded. He is defending the Risale-i Nur, so it cannot be said 
he deviated from the subject. Eskişehir Court found nothing after studying its hundred 
treatises, both confidential and  

                                             

3 The severe earthquakes which occurred the four times the Risale-i Nur was contested proved 

that it would be “most regretable for this country.” 

 

375

otherwise,  for  four  months,  apart  from  one  or  two  points  touching  on  a  subject 
necessitating  a  light penalty, and it gave six-month sentences to  fifteen people out of 
one hundred and twenty. I served the sentence as well. And since a few years ago all 
the parts of the Risale-i Nur came into the hands of the Isparta authorities, who after 
studying  them  for  several  months,  returned  them  to  their  owners;  and  since  after 
serving that sentence, nothing was found to concern the police and judiciary during my 
eight years in Kastamonu despite the minute searches; and since during the last search 
in Kastamonu some of my treatises came to light, in a condition they could never have 
been  published,  having  been  hidden  under  piles  of  firewood several years previously, 
as was verified by the group of police; and since although the Kastamonu Police Chief 
and judiciary gave their certain word to return those harmless books of mine that had 
been hidden, I was moved on without receiving those trusts, since on the second day 
the order suddenly came from Isparta for my arrest; and since the courts of Denizli and 
Ankara  acquitted  us  and  returned  all  my  treatises;  certainly  and  without  doubt,  as  a 
consequence of the above six facts, it is demanded by their positions that Afyon Court 
and its public prosecutor take into consideration this very important right of mine, as 
did Denizli Court and public prosecutor. I am hopeful that the public prosecutor, who 
defends the rights of the people, will also defend my personal rights, which due to my 
relation  with  the  Risale-i  Nur  are  like  important  public  rights;  and  I  await  this  from 
him. 

The New Said has for twenty-two years withdrawn from social life, and does not 
know  the  present  laws  and  how  defences  should  be  carried  out,  and  is  presenting to 
this  new  court  the  irrefutable  hundred-page  defence  he  presented  to  Eskişehir  and 
Denizli  Courts;  he  paid  the  penalty  for  his  errors  up  to  that  time,  and  after  that  in 
Kastamonu  and  Emirdağ  lived  in  a  sort  of  solitary  confinement  under  constant 
surveillance; he is therefore now falling silent and leaving it to the Old Said to speak. 
And the Old Said says this: 

Since the New Said has turned away from the world, he does not speak with ‘the 
worldly’ unless  absolutely compelled to defend himself, and considers it unnecessary. 
But numerous innocent artisans and tradesmen being arrested in this affair due to some 
slight connection with me aroused my extreme sympathy, since at this busy time they 
have been unable to earn livelihoods for their families. It upset me deeply. I swear that 
if it had been possible, I would have taken all their difficulties upon myself. Anyway, if 
there  is  any  fault,  it  is  mine.  They  are  innocent.  Because  of  this  grievous situation, I 
say,  despite  the  New  Said’s  silence:  since  the  wretched  New  Said  answered  the 
hundreds of unnecessary ques 

 

376

tions of the public prosecutors of Isparta, Denizli, and Afyon, it is my right to ask of 
the  present  Ministry  of  Justice,  with  the  intention  of  defending  my  rights,  the  three 
questions  I  asked  the  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs,  and  chiefly  Kaya  Shükrü,  thirteen 
years ago. 

The First: Which law states that one hundred and twenty people including myself 
should be arrested because of the merely verbal argument with a gendarme sergeant of 
a  man  from  Egirdir,  who  though  not  a  Risale-i  Nur  student  was  carrying  an 
unimportant letter of mine? Then with the exception of fifteen, the innocence of all of 
them was established by their being acquitted after four months of investigation by the 
court.  According  to  what  principles  is  it  to  cite  such  possibilities  instead  of 
occurrences? According to what rule of justice is it to cause loss of thousands of liras 
to seventy unfortunates who had previously been acquitted by Denizli Court after nine 
months of investigations? 

Second Question: According to the fundamental principle, No bearer of burdens 
can bear the burden of another,4 even a blood-brother cannot be held responsible for 
his  brother’s  faults,  so  under  which  law  of  justice  was  it  to  arrest  me  in  Ramadan 
because of a short treatise whose  publication I had prevented, which had passed into 
my  hands  once  or  twice  in  eight  years,  was  originally  written  more  than  twenty-five 
years  ago,  saves  believers  from  doubting  a  number  of  important  points  and  prevents 
them  denying  some  misunderstood  allegorical  Hadiths,  —because  this  treatise  was 
found on someone I did not know a long way away from me, and the wrong meaning 
was given to this, and an offensive letter was found in Kütahya and Balıkesir; and to 
arrest  now  in  this  freezing  cold  numerous  artisans  and  tradesmen  for  having  in  their 
possession  some  old,  commonplace  letter  written  by  me,  or  for  having  driven  me 
around in their carriage, or because of their friendship towards me, or for having read 
one  of  my  books,  and  to  ruin  them,  and  cause  them,  and  the  country  and  nation, 
material  loss  and  immaterial  loss  of  thousands  of  liras,—  what  law  demands  this? 
Which article of which law necessitates it? I request to learn of these laws so I do not 
take any false step. 

Yes,  one  reason  for  our  arrests  at  both  Denizli  and  Afyon  was  this:  even  if  to 
suppose the impossible the Fifth Ray did look to this world and politics, —although it 
was  written  long  ago  while  I  was  in  the  Darü’l-Hikmeti’l-Islâmiye,5  and  the  original 
was written even before that, with  

                                             

4 Qur’an, 6:164, etc. 
5 The Darü’l-Hikmeti’l-Islâmiye was a learned body set up in 1918 to find solutions for the 
problems confronting the Islamic world, and to provide scholarly answers for attacks made on Islam. 
It was attached to the Shaykh al-Islam’s Office and was composed of nine permanent members and 
various officers. Bediuzzaman’s appointment was ratified by the Caliph in August 1918. 

 

377

the  idea  of  saving  the  belief  of  the  ordinary  people  in  the  face  of  those  who  denied 
some Hadiths because they thought they were irrational, since they did not known how 
they should be interpreted— and even if it had been written at this time, since it was 
private, and was not found with me in the searches, and its predictions about the future 
turned out to be true, and it dispels doubts on questions of belief, and does not disturb 
public  order,  and  is  not  confrontational, and only gives news of things, and does not 
specify any individuals, and sets out  a scholarly truth in general form, — since this is 
the case, surely even if the Hadith’s meaning is seen to conform to certain persons at 
this time, and before it was exhibited and made public in the courts it had been held to 
be  confidential  in  order  not  to  give  rise  to  dispute,  it  cannot  in  any  way constitute a 
crime.  I  also  do  not  consider  it  possible  that  in  any  court  of  law  in  the  world  it  is 
considered  a  crime  to  say  “to  reject  something  is  one  thing,  and  not  to  accept  it  on 
scholarly grounds or not to act in accordance with it is something completely different. 
That treatise does not accept on scholarly grounds a regime that was going to emerge 
in the near future.” 

In Short: The Risale-i Nur has for thirty years killed at the root absolute disbelief, 
which destroys eternal life, turns the life of this world into a ghastly poison, spoiling all 
its pleasures; it has successfully killed the atheistic ideas of the Naturalists; has proved 
brilliantly  with  wonderful  arguments  the  principles  that  will  bring  happiness  to  this 
nation  in  both  this  life  and  the  next;  and  is  based  on  the  Qur’an’s  reality,  from  the 
Divine Throne. I claim, and am ready to prove it, that not one or two points of a short 
treatise such as that, but if it contained a thousand errors, its thousand significant good 
aspects would cause them to be forgiven. 

Third  Question:  It  is  the  rule  that  if  in  a  letter  of  twenty  words  five  are 
considered  reprehensible,  the  five  are  censored  and  the  rest  are  permitted.  So  since 
after scrutinizing it for four months Eskişehir Court could find only fifteen words out 
of  a  hundred  thousand  that  to  the  superficial  view were imagined to be harmful; and 
since  the  Cabinet  questioned  only  the  explanations  of  two  Qur’anic  verses,  because 
they  contravened  the  present  law  although  they  had  been  written  thirty  years 
previously, on two of the four hundred pages of Zülfikâr; and the Denizli and Ankara 
Committees  of  Experts  questioned  only  fifteen  errors;  and  since  up  to  the  present  it 
has  been  the  means  of  reforming  the  characters  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  people, 
the  Risale-i  Nur  has  brought  to  pass  a  thousand  things  widely  beneficial  for  this 
country  and  nation;  —since  this  is  so,  which  principle  of  the  Government  of  the 
Republic  does  it  conform  to,  to  arrest  in  this  work-season  and  bitter  winter 
unfortunates  like  the  Çalışkan’s  who  serve  me  seeking  God’s  pleasure,  because  they 
have  

 

378

performed some small service for  the Risale-i Nur, or written out one of its treatises 
because  it  had  saved  their  belief,  and  were  brotherly  towards  me  out  of  kindness 
because I was elderly and a stranger in Emirdağ? Which of its laws would permit such 
a thing? 

Since  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  freedom  of  conscience  the  principles  of the 
Republic do not interfere with those without religion, surely it necessitates that they do 
not interfere with religiously-minded people who are not involved in the world as far 
as it is possible, and do not dispute with the worldly, and strive usefully for their lives 
in  the  hereafter,  their  belief,  and  their  country  too.  I  know  that  the  politicians  who 
govern  in  Asia,  where  the  prophets  appeared,  will  not,  and  cannot,  ban  taqwa  and 
good works, which for a thousand years have been as essential for this nation as food 
and medicine. Humanity demands that anything not conforming to the current view in 
the  above  questions  is  overlooked,  since,  having  lived  in  solitude  for  twenty  years, 
they were asked with the head of the Said of twenty years ago. 

I  consider  it  my  patriotic  duty  to  recall  the  following,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
country, nation, and public security:  to arrest and make resentful in this way because 
of  some  slight  connection  with  me  and  the  Risale-i  Nur,  may  turn  against  the 
Government  numerous  people  who  are  religiously  beneficial  for  the  country  and  its 
security, thus opening up the way to anarchy. Yes, there are far in excess of a hundred 
thousand  people  who  have  saved  their  belief  through  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  have 
become  harmless  and  highly  beneficial  for  the  nation.  With  their  moderation  and 
usefulness, they are perhaps to be found in every large department of the Government 
of  the  Republic  and  in  every  level  of  society.  It  is essential that these people are not 
offended but protected. 

I feel a strong anxiety that certain official persons who do not heed our complaints 
nor allow us to speak out, and repress us on various pretexts are opening up the way 
to anarchy to the harm of this country. 

Also, for the good of the Government I say this: since the courts of both Denizli 
and Ankara scrutinized the Fifth Ray, and did not object to it but returned it to us, it is 
essential  for  the  Government that  proceedings are not reopened officially, giving rise 
to rumours and gossip. Just as I concealed the treatise before it passed into the hands 
of  the  courts  and  they  publicized  it,  so  the  Afyon  authorities  and  Court  should  not 
make it the object of question and answer. For it is powerful and irrefutable. It made 
predictions, and they turned out right. Moreover, its aim is not this world, at the most 
one  of  its  many  meanings  fits  a  person  who  is  dead  and  gone.  For  the  sake  of  the 
country, nation, public order, and government, I  

 

am  bound  by  conscience  to  warn  against  making  those  predictions  and  meanings 
official due to bigoted friendship for him, and further publicizing it by reprimanding us. 

379

* * * 

To the Afyon Public Prosecutor and the Chairman 
and Members of the Court 

 [I am presenting to you in order to protect my rights, exactly the same nine 
‘Principles’ which I presented to the Denizli judicial authorities.] 

Twenty  years  ago  I  abandoned  social  life,  and  especially  official,  refined, 
political  life  such  as  this.  I  do  not  know  what  position  should  be  taken  in 
such  situations,  and  I  do  not  think  of  it, and to think of it causes me acute 
distress.  But  I  am  compelled  to  present  this  disorganized  defence  and 
petition,  which is the conclusion  and summary  of  the  answers I gave to the 
numerous,  repetitious,  and  haphazard  questions  of  an  unfair  member  of 
another  court  of  law.  Perhaps  it  lacks  order  and  contains  irrelevant  and 
unnecessary  repetitions,  vehement  expressions  which  may  act  against  me, 
and  sentences  opposed  to  the  new  laws,  which  I  do  not  know.  But  since  it 
proceeds  on  the  truth,  for  the  sake  of  the  truth  the  faults  should  be 
disregarded. This petition and defence speech is based on nine ‘Principles’. 

The  First:  Since  in  accordance  with  the  Republic’s  principle  of  freedom  of 
conscience, the Government of the Republic does not interfere with the irreligious and 
dissipated, it certainly should not interfere with the religious and righteous; and since 
no  irreligious  nation  can  continue  in  existence, and with regard to religion Asia does 
not conform to Europe, and an irreligious Muslim does not resemble any other person 
without  religion;  and  since  no  sort  of  progress  or  civilization  can  take  the  place  of 
religion, or righteousness, or the learning of the truths of belief in particular, which are 
the innate need of the people of this country, who for a thousand years have illumined 
the world with their religion and heroically preserved their firmness of faith in the face 
of the assaults of the whole world, and cannot be made to forget that need; surely no 
government of this nation in this country can intervene in the Risale-i Nur in respect of 
justice and the law and public order. 

 

380

Second  Principle: Since it is one thing to reject something and something quite 
different not to act in accordance with it; and all governments have fierce opponents; 
and  there  were  Muslims  under  Zoroastrian  rule  and  Jews  and  Christians  under  the 
Islamic government of the Caliph ‘Umar; and all those who do not cause trouble to the 
government  or  disturb  public  order  have  personal  freedom,  and  this  may  not  be 
curtailed, and governments look to the hand and not to the heart; and since those who 
want  to  upset  public  order  and  the  administration  and  interfere  in  politics  will 
doubtless concern themselves with the newspapers and current affairs in order to learn 
about the movements, situations, and events that will assist them so they make no false 
moves;  and  since  the  Risale-i  Nur  so  restrains  its  students  that  as  my  close  friends 
know, for twenty-five years it has made me give up reading the newspapers and even 
asking  about  them  or  being  curious  and  thinking about them; and since for ten years 
now  I  have  withdrawn  from  social life  to such an extent that apart from the German 
defeat and the spread of communism I have heard no news about what is happening in 
the world and the current situation; certainly and without doubt no one can attack me 
and my brothers like me on grounds of governmental wisdom, the laws of politics, and 
principles of justice; and if they do, it is bound to be due to delusions, or out of hatred 
or obduracy. 

Third Principle: I am obliged to give the following lengthy details because of the 
meaningless and unnecessary objections of the public prosecutor of the former court, 
which he made due to a misunderstanding concerning not the law, but his bigoted love 
of a certain dead person.  

Firstly: Before it fell into the hands of the Government, I treated the Fifth Ray as 
confidential. Moreover, it was not found in any of the searches. Also, its purpose was 
only to save the ordinary people from doubts concerning their beliefs and from denying 
allegorical Hadiths. It looks to worldly aspects of the Hadiths only indirectly, in third 
or  fourth  place.  The  predictions  it  makes are true. Moreover, it does not contest the 
politicians and worldly; it only makes predictions. Also, it does not specify anyone. It 
explains  in  general  fashion  a  true  meaning  of  a Hadith. But they  applied that general 
truth  to  a  fearsome  person  living  in  this  century.  They  therefore  objected  to  it, 
supposing  it  had  been written in recent years. In fact, the original of the  treatise was 
previous to the Darü’l-Hikmet. But it was set in order some time later, and included in 
the Risale-i Nur. It was like this: 

Forty years ago, the year before the Proclamation of the Constitution,6  

                                             

6 The Proclamation of the (Second) Constitution in July, 1908. 

 

381

I  came  to  Istanbul.  The  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Japanese  army  had  asked  some 
questions of the Istanbul ‘ulama at that time. The Istanbul hojas asked me about them. 
They asked me many things in that connection. 

For  instance,  they  asked  me  about  a  Hadith  which  says:  “At  the  end  of  time,  a 
fearsome individual will rise in the morning and on his forehead will be written: ‘This 
is  an infidel.’”7 I told them: “This extraordinary person will come  to lead this nation; 
he will rise in the morning, put a [brimmed] hat on his head, and make others wear it.” 
After  receiving  this  answer,  they  asked  me:  “Won’t  those  who  wear  it  be 
infidels?”  I  said:  “They  will  be  made  to  wear  the  brimmed  hat  and  be  forbidden  to 
prostrate in prayer. But the belief in the heads of those wearing the brimmed hat will 
make the hat prostrate, and God willing, will make it Muslim.” 

They then said: “This person will drink water and his hand will be pierced, and it 
will  be  known  through  this  that  he  is  the  Sufyan.”  I  said  to  them  in  reply:  “It  is 
commonly said about someone who is very extravagant that he has a hole in his hand. 
That  is,  he  cannot  hold  onto  anything;  it  flows  from  him  and  is  lost.  Thus,  this 
fearsome man will be addicted to raki, it will make him ill, he will become excessively 
extravagant and accustom others to being the same.” 

Then  someone  asked:  “When  he  dies,  Satan  will  proclaim  loudly  to  the  world 
from  ‘Dikili  Ta_’  in  Istanbul  that  so-and-so  has  died.”  So  I  said:  “The  news  will  be 
broadcast by telegraph.” However, I heard shortly afterwards that the radio had been 
invented, and I realized that my answer had not been completely accurate. Eight years 
later while in the Darü’l-Hikmet, I said: “Satan will broadcast it to the world by radio.” 
They  then  asked  me  questions  about  the  Barrier  of  Dhu’l-Qarnayn,  Gog  and 
Magog, the Beast (Dabbat al-Ard), the Antichrist (Dajjal), and the second coming of 
Jesus  (Peace  be  upon  him),  and  I  replied  to  them.  In  fact  the  answers  are  written  in 
part  in  my  old  treatises.  Some  time  later,  Mustafa  Kemal  twice  summoned  me  to 
Ankara8  by  code  by  means  of  the  former  governor  of  the  province  of  Van,  my  old 
friend,  Tahsin  Bey,  in  recognition  of  my  published  work  The  Six  Steps  (Hutuvât-i 
Sitte). I went. Since Shaykh Sanusi9 did not know Kurdish, it was proposed I should  

                                             

7 Bukhari, Fitan, 26; Muslim, Fitan, 101, 102; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 62; Musnad, iii, 115; 211, 228, 
249, 250; v, 38, 404-5; vi, 139-40. For this and the other Hadiths about the signs of the end of time, 
see, The Fifth Ray in the present work. 

8 In 1922, during the Independence Struggle. [Tr.] 
9 Sayyid Ahmad Sanusi. He took over the leadership of the Sanusiyya movement in North Africa 

in the early 1900’s, and fought alongside the Ottomans against Italian aggression in 1911. As a 
staunch supporter of the Caliphate, he was invited to Istanbul in 1918, and subsequently appointed 
‘General Preacher’ in eastern Turkey and greatly assisted the Turks in the War of Independence. [Tr.] 

 

382

take  his  place  as  ‘general  preacher’  of  the  Eastern  Provinces  on  a  salary  of  three 
hundred liras. I was also offered a position as a deputy, and my former post together 
with  the  other  members  of  the  Darü’l-Hikmet  within  the  Directorate  of  Religious 
Affairs. Moreover, being endorsed by one hundred and sixty-three out of two hundred 
deputies,  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  liras  were  allotted  for  the  Medresetü’z-
Zehra, my university in the East, the foundations of which I had laid in Van, and this 
was  accepted.  However,  since  I  saw  that  the  predictions  of  the  original  of  the  Fifth 
Ray  were  in  part  realized  in  a  person  there,  I  was  compelled  to  forgo  those  most 
important duties. Telling myself that the person could not be opposed or confronted, I 
gave up  the  world,  and  politics,  and  the  life  of  society,  and  dedicated  all my time to 
saving religious belief. However, a number of tyrannical and unjust officials forced me 
to write two or three treatises which looked to the world. 

Later, in connection with some questions asked by some persons about allegorical 
Hadiths  which  give  news  of  the  events  at  the  end  of  time,  I  rearranged  that  old 
treatise.  It  received  the  name  of  the  Fifth  Ray.  The  Risale-i  Nur  is  not  numbered 
chronologically.  For  example,  the  Thirty-Third  Letter  was  written  before  the  First 
Letter, and the original of the Fifth Ray and some other parts were written previously 
to the Risale-i Nur itself. Anyway... the illegal, unnecessary, and inaccurate objections 
and  questions  of  a  public  prosecutor,  asked  out  of  bigoted  love  of  Mustafa  Kemal, 
forced  me  to  provide  these  explanations  outside  the  subject.  I  am  giving  here  as  an 
example  some of the entirely personal and unlawful things he said in the name of the 
law. He said: 

“Aren’t you sincerely sorry that you insulted him in the Fifth Ray with expressions 
like ‘swilling down raki and wine like a water pump’?” I say in reply to the completely 
meaningless  and  mistaken  bigotry  arising  from  his  love:  “The  victory  and  honour  of 
the heroic army cannot be ascribed to him; he can have only a share of it. Like it would 
be  tyrannical  and  an  awesome  injustice  if  the  booty,  possessions,  and  rations  of  an 
army  were  all  given to its commander. Yes, just as he accused  me of not loving that 
unjust  and  extremely  faulty  man,  quite  simply  accusing  me  of  being  a  traitor,  so  I 
accuse him of not loving the army, for he ascribes all its honour and moral booty to the 
man  he  loves,  depriving  the  army  of  all  glory.  The  reality  is  that positive things, and 
instances  of  good  and  virtue,  should  be  distributed  among  the  community  and  army, 
and the negative things, destruction, and faults ascribed to the chief. For the existence 
of  

 

383

something  is  dependent  on  the  existence  of  all  its  conditions  and  elements,  and  the 
commander is only one of the conditions. While the non-existence of the thing and its 
falling apart, occurs through the non-existence of one of its conditions and one of its 
elements  being  spoilt  and  destroyed.  Instances  of  good  and  virtues  for the most  part 
are positive and pertain to existence. The leaders cannot lay claim to them. Instances 
of  bad  and  faults  are  destructive  and  pertain  to  non-existence,  and  the  leaders  are 
answerable  for  them.  While  the  reality  is  thus,  just as if a tribe is mocked if,  when it 
wins victories ‘Hasan Aga’ is applauded, and when it is defeated it is blamed, and this 
is judged to be the reverse of the truth; in just the same way, in the name of the court 
the  public  prosecutor  imputed  a  fault  to  me  that  was  completely  the  reverse  of  the 
truth and reality. 

Similarly to his mistake, a little previously to the Great War while I was in Van, a 
number  of  religious,  God-fearing  persons  came  to  me.  They  told  me:  “Some  of  the 
military commanders act contrarily to religion. Come and join us, we are going to rebel 
against them.”  

I told them: “Bad conduct and irreligion like that is particular to commanders like 
them;  the  army  cannot  be  held  responsible  for  it.  There  are  perhaps  a  hundred 
thousand saints in the Ottoman Army; I shall not draw my sword against it. I will not 
join you.” They left me, drew their swords, and the fruitless Bitlis Incident occurred. A 
short  time  later  war  broke  out.  The  army  took  part  in  it  in  the  name  of  religion;  it 
entered  the  jihad,  and  a  hundred  thousand  martyrs  from  it  rose  to  the  degree  of 
sainthood.  They  confirmed  what  I  had  said,  signing  the  decrees  for  their  sainthood 
with  their  blood.  Anyway...  I  was  compelled  to  relate  this  at  some  length.  The 
extraordinary attitude of a public prosecutor who acted derisively towards myself and 
the  Risale-i  Nur  due  to  unimportant,  mistaken  feelings  and  partiality,  in  the  name  of 
justice,  one  incontrovertible  mark  of  which  is  imperviousness  to  all  feelings  and 
outside influences, drove me to make this long statement. 

Fourth  Principle:  After  scrutinizing  for  four  months  hundreds  of  copies  of 
treatises and letters, Eskişehir Court could only give sentences of six months to fifteen 
men out of one hundred and twenty, and one year to myself for fifteen words in one or 
two  treatises  out  of  a  hundred.  They  acquitted  us  of  founding  a  sufi  order  and 
organizing  a  political  society  and  in  the  hat  question.  We  anyway  had  served  the 
sentence. Then in Kastamonu they found nothing in numerous searches. And a number 
of  years  ago  in  Isparta  all  the  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  without  exception,  both 
confidential and otherwise, fell into the hands of the authorities. They were all returned 
to  their  owners  after  three  months  of  scrutiny.  A  few  years  later,  all the parts of the 
Risale-i Nur remained for two years in  

 

384

the Courts of Denizli and Ankara, then they were all returned to us. Since the fact is 
that, those who accuse myself and the Risale-i Nur students emotionally, maliciously, 
and unlawfully in the name of the law like him, are accusing before us both Eskişehir 
Court,  and  Denizli  Court,  and  Ankara  Criminal  Court,  making  them  partners  in  our 
crime, if there is one. For if we had been guilty, those three or four authorities did not 
see it despite their close scrutiny or they disregarded it, and two courts did not see it 
having  studied  it  minutely  for  two  years,  or  they  disregarded  it,  which  makes  them 
more  guilty  than  us.  However,  if  we  had  had  any  desire  to  interfere  in  the  world,  it 
would  not  have  been  with  the  buzzing  of  a  fly,  it  would  have  exploded  and boomed 
like a cannon. 

Yes,  anyone  who  accuses  of  political  intrigue  a  person  who  defended  himself 
vehemently and without restraint in the Military Court after the Thirty-First of March 
Incident10 and in the Speaker’s Office in the face of Mustafa Kemal’s anger, saying he 
was  hatching  his  schemes  for  eighteen  years  without  allowing  anyone  to  detect  it, 
surely does so for some malicious purpose. We are hopeful that like the Denizli public 
prosecutor, the  Afyon public prosecutor will save us from the malice and accusations 
of such people and demonstrate true justice. 

Fifth Principle: A fundamental principle of the Risale-i Nur students is that as far 
as  is  possible  they  do  not  interfere  in  politics,  or  matters  of  administration,  or 
government  activities,  because  for  them,  working  seriously  for  the  Qur’an  is  worth 
everything, and is sufficient. 

Also,  no  one  who  enters  politics,  among  the  overwhelming  currents  that  now 
prevail, can preserve his independence and sincerity. He is bound to become subject to 
one  of  the  currents,  and  it  will  exploit  him  for  worldly  ends.  It  will  corrupt  the 
sacredness  of  his  duty.  Also,  in  the  material  struggle,  due  to  the  utter  tyranny  and 
despotism  that  is  the  rule  this  century,  he  would  have  to  crush  numerous  innocent 
supporters of a person because of the error that person had made. He would otherwise 
be defeated. It would also seem in the view of those who had given up their religion 
for  the  world,  or  who  exploited  it,  that  the  Qur’an’s  sacred truths,  which can be the 
tool  of  nothing,  were  being  exploited  for  political  propaganda.  Also,  every  class  of 
people, supporters and opposers, officials and common people, should have a share of 
those  truths  and  all are in need of them. The Risale-i Nur students have  therefore to 
avoid politics and the material struggle completely, and not be in any way involved in 
them, so that they may remain completely impartial. 

                                             

10 The name given the revolt which broke out in the army in Istanbul in 1909 and resulted in the 

dethronement of Sultan ‘Abdulhamid. Despite playing a pacifying role, Bediuzzaman was arrested 
following the revolt along with many others and tried, but was acquitted. [Tr.] 

 

385

Sixth Principle:  The Risale-i Nur should not be attacked in this matter because 
of  my  personal  faults  or  those  of  some  of  my  brothers.  It  is  bound  directly  to  the 
Qur’an,  and  the  Qur’an  is  bound  to  the  Supreme  Throne.  Who  has  the  ability  to 
stretch  out  his  hand  and  unfasten  it?  Also,  as  is  indicated  by  thirty-three  Qur’anic 
verses, Imam ‘Ali’s (May God be pleased with him) three miraculous prophecies and 
the  certain  pronouncements  of  Gawth  al-A‘zam  (May  his  mystery  be  sanctified),  the 
Risale-i Nur has performed an extraordinary service for this country and is a source of 
material plenty and spiritual effulgence for it, and cannot therefore be held responsible 
for  our  petty,  personal  faults,  and  it  should  not  be  held  responsible.  Otherwise  both 
material  and  spiritual  loss  will  be  caused  to  this  country  which  it  will  impossible  to 
repair.  

God  willing,  the  assaults  and  diabolical  machinations  against  the  Risale-i Nur of 
the  atheists  hostile  to  us  will  be  foiled,  for  its  students  cannot  be  compared  with 
others, they cannot be scattered nor be made to give it up; through God’s grace, they 
will  not  be  defeated.  If  the  Qur’an  had  not  prohibited  them  from  physical  defence... 
those students, who are everywhere and have won public favour, which is like the life-
blood of this nation,  would never get involved in petty and fruitless incidents like the 
Shaykh Said11  and  Menemen  incidents.12  If,  God  forbid,  they  were persecuted to the 
point they were compelled and the Risale-i Nur attacked, the atheists and dissemblers 
who deceive the Government would regret it a thousand times over. 

In Short: Since we do not interfere in the worlds of the worldly, they should not 

interfere in our work for the hereafter and our service of religious belief. 

[I am relating here by way of defence an old memory and pleasant anecdote 
which was not divulged in Eskişehir Court and was not written in the official 
records, nor has been included in my defence speeches.]  

They asked me there: “What do you think about the Republic?” I replied: “As my 
biography  which  you  have  in  your  hands  proves,  I  was  a  religious  republican  before 
any of you, with the exception of the Chairman of the Court, was born. A summary is 
this:  like  now,  I  was  living  at  that  time  in  seclusion  in  a  remote  tomb.  They  used  to 
bring  me  soup,  and  I  would  give  breadcrumbs  to  the  ants.  I  used  to  eat  my  bread 
having  

                                             

11 The famous Shaykh Said Revolt which broke out in February, 1925 in eastern Turkey. 

Bediuzzaman strongly advised its leaders against undertaking any such action against the 
Government, as it would “... make Ahmed kill Mehmed, and Hasan kill Husayn.” [Tr.] 

12 A minor incident which occurred in the town of Menemen in western Turkey 1930, but was 
blown up out of all proportion and brutally suppressed. Bediuzzaman was in no way involved in it. 
[Tr.] 

 

386

dipped it in the soup. They asked me about it and I told them: the ant and bee nations 
are  republicans.  I  give  the  breadcrumbs  to  the  ants  out  of  respect  for  their 
republicanism.” 

Then  they  said  to  me:  “You  are  opposing  the  righteous  early  generations  of 
Islam.” I told them in reply: “The four Rightly-Guided Caliphs were both Caliphs and 
Presidents of the Republic. Abu Bakr the Veracious (May God be pleased with him), 
the Ten Promised Paradise, and the Companions of the Prophet were like presidents of 
the  republic.  But  not  as  an  empty  name  and  title,  they  were  heads  of  a  religious 
republic  which  bore  the  meaning  of  true  justice  and  freedom  in  accordance  with the 
Shari‘a.” 

I told them: Mr. Prosecutor and Members of the Court! You are accusing me of 
holding an idea opposite to that which I have held for fifty years. If you ask me about 
the  secular  republic,  what  I  understand  by  it  is  that  ‘secular’  (laic)  means  to  be 
impartial; that is, a government which, in accordance with the principle of freedom of 
conscience,  does  not  interfere  with  the  religiously-minded  and  pious,  the  same  as  it 
does  not  interfere  with  the  irreligious  and  dissipated.  I  withdrew  from  political  and 
social  life  twenty-five  years ago, and  what form the Government of the Republic has 
taken,  I  do  not  know.  If,  I  seek  refuge  with  God,  it  has  assumed  a  fearsome  form 
whereby, on account of irreligion, it passes and accepts laws to incriminate those who 
work  for  their  belief  and  lives in the hereafter, then I  announce to you fearlessly and 
warn  you  that  if  I  had  a  thousand  lives, I would be ready to sacrifice all of them for 
belief  and  life  in  the  hereafter.  Do  whatever  you  will!  My  last  word  is  For  us  God 
suffices,  and  He  is  the  Best  Disposer  of  Affairs!  In  response  to  your  wrongfully 
condemning  me  to  capital  punishment  or  hard  labour,  I  say:  as  the  Risale-i  Nur  has 
discovered  and  shown  with  absolute  certainty,  I  am  not  being  executed;  I  am  being 
discharged and departing for the world of light and happiness. As for you, our covert 
enemies, wretches who oppress us on account of misguidance! Since I know you are 
condemned to eternal extinction and everlasting solitary confinement, and I have seen 
this, I have taken my revenge on you totally, and am ready to surrender up my spirit 
with a perfectly easy mind! 

Seventh  Principle:  In  consequence  of  superficial  investigations  held  in  other 

places, Afyon Court looked on us as a political society. My reply is this: 

Firstly:  As  is  testified  to  by  all  those  who  have  befriended  me,  I  have  read  no 
newspaper  for  nineteen  years,  nor  listened  to  one,  nor  asked  about  one,  and  for the 
past ten years five months have received no news except  

 

387

about the German defeat and the terror of communism, and I have not been curious, 
and have not known. Such a person surely has no connection whatsoever with politics, 
and no relations with any political society. 

Secondly: The one hundred and thirty parts of the Risale-i Nur are there for all to 
see.  Understanding  that  they  contained  no  worldly  goal  and  no  aim  other  than  the 
truths  of  belief,  Eskişehir  Court  did  not  object  to  them  with  the  exception  of one or 
two  of  the  parts,  and  Denizli  Court  objected  to  none  at  all,  and  despite  being  under 
constant  surveillance  for  eight  years  the  large  Kastamonu  police  force  could  find  no 
one to charge apart from my two assistants and three others, and those charges were 
merely pretexts. This is a decisive proof that the students of the Risale-i Nur are in no 
way  a  political  society.  If  what  is  intended  by  ‘society’  in  the  indictment  is  a 
community concerned with religious belief and the hereafter, in reply we say this: 

If the name ‘community’ is given to university students and tradesmen, it may also 
be  applied  to  us.  But  if  you  call  us  a  community  that  is  going  to  breach  internal 
security by exploiting religious feelings, in response we say: 

The  facts  that  in  no  place  over  a  period  of  twenty  years  in  these  stormy  times 
Risale-i Nur students have breached internal security or disturbed public order, and no 
such  incident  has  been  recorded  by  either  the  Government  or  any  court,  refutes  this 
accusation. If the name community is given meaning it might breach internal security in 
the future through strengthening religious feelings, we say this: 

Firstly,  foremost  the  Directorate  of  Religious  Affairs,  and  all  preachers,  perform 

the same service. 

Secondly, it is not disturbing the peace and breaching security, the students of the 
Risale-i Nur protect the nation from anarchy with all their strength and conviction, and 
maintain  public  order  and  guard  security.  The  evidence  for  this  has  been cited  in  the 
First Principle. 

Yes, we are a community, and our aim and programme is to save firstly ourselves 
and  then  our  nation  from  eternal  annihilation  and  everlasting  solitary  confinement  in 
the Intermediate Realm, and to protect our compatriots from anarchy and lawlessness, 
and to protect ourselves with the firm truths of the Risale-i Nur against atheism, which 
is the means to destroying our lives in this world and in the next. 

Eighth  Principle:  Saying  its  treatises  contain  some  sharp  expressions,  they 
accuse us as a result of deficient and superficial study of the Risale-i Nur carried out in 
other places. In reply I say this: since our aim is belief  

 

388

and  the  hereafter,  it  is  not  confrontation  with  the  worldly.  And  since  the  sharpness 
particular  to  these  very  insignificant  one  or  two  treatises  was  not  intentional  —we 
bumped against the worldly while advancing towards our goal— it certainly does not 
infer  political  prejudice.  And  since  possibilities  are  one  thing  and  occurrences  are 
something  else,  and  what  we  have  been  accused  of  is  “possibly”  disturbing  public 
order, not having disturbed it, it is meaningless, for anyone may kill someone else. And 
since  over  a  period  of  twenty  years  in  their  scrupulous  investigations  into  twenty 
thousand  people  and  thousands  of  copies  and  letters,  and  in  their  searches,  neither 
Eskişehir,  nor  Kastamonu,  nor  Isparta, nor Denizli  could find anything  constituting a 
real  crime,  Eskişehir  Court  was  compelled  to  find  us  guilty  because  of  one  short 
treatise under one article of an ‘elastic’ law, and could only give six-month sentences 
to  fifteen  people  out  of  a  hundred  in  such  a  way  that they should have sentenced all 
who teach religion. I wonder if the twenty confidential letters one of your people had 
written  over  a  year  were  scrutinized,  wouldn’t  they  contain  twenty  incriminating 
sentences which would shame him? But the fact that in twenty thousand copies of the 
treatises  and  letters  from  twenty  thousand  people  they  could  not  find  twenty  truly 
incriminating sentences shows that the Risale-i Nur’s aim is solely the hereafter. It has 
no business with this world. 

Ninth  Principle:  As  with  the  matters  which  Denizli  Court’s  just  prosecutor 
included in the indictment because of the unfair and superficial records of other places, 
so with Afyon Court —as indicated by what we experienced while being questioned— 
pretexts have been made so that we have been charged concerning the same matters, 
and  undated  letters,  and  correspondence  over  twenty, fifteen,  and  ten  years,  and the 
Fifth Ray —decisive answers about which are found in the Third Principle above and 
in  the  Second  Question  of  my  petition  above—  and  four  or  five  treatises  out  of the 
hundred  and  thirty  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  a  number  of  letters  and  treatises  which 
were  scrutinized  by  Eskişehir  Court  and  for  which  the  sentences  were  served,  were 
later covered by the pardon and were acquitted by Denizli Court. Can it be said about 
someone who with a speech outside the War Ministry during the Thirty-First of March 
Incident  brought  to  order  eight  battalions  which  had  not heeded the Shaykh al-Islam 
and ‘ulama, that he strove for eight years —as stated by the police report— and only 
succeeded  in  deceiving  twenty  or  thirty  people?  For  instance,  in  the  large  town  of 
Kastamonu he was able to hoodwink only five people? For during the Denizli affair, in 
Kastamonu they pulled out all my papers and books, both confidential and otherwise, 
from under the firewood, and after studying them for three months could find no one  

 

389

in that large town other than Feyzi, Emin, Hilmi, Tevfik, and Sâdik. Because Feyzi and 
the  others  had  performed  some  personal  services  for  me  for  God’s  sake,  they  sent 
them to prison, together with the three brothers and three or four others they found in 
Emirdağ,  who  had  assisted  me  for  three  and  a  half  years.  If  I  had  done  what  that 
superficial report stated, I would have deceived not five or ten people but five hundred 
or perhaps five thousand, or even five hundred thousand. As in Denizli Court I pointed 
out  the  many  errors  in  the  police  reports,  so  too  here  I  am  pointing  out  one  or  two 
examples: 

They  accused  us  of  “corrupting  religion”  because,  following  an  Islamic  custom 
practised since the age of  the Prophet,  I had compiled a Hizb al-Qur’ani like a large 
An‘am13  out  of  the  hundreds  of  well-known  verses  which  form  the  sources  of  the 
Risale-i Nur. 

Also, they want to incriminate us by showing that the Treatise On Islamic Dress 
(Tesettür Risalesi) was written and published this year, whereas I have already served 
a  year’s  sentence  for  it,  and  I  treated  it  as  confidential,  and  as  noted  in  the  police 
report, it was pulled out from under piles of firewood. Also, although the well-known 
person did not respond and was silent in the face of the objections and harsh words I 
said to him in the Speaker’s Office in the Assembly in Ankara, with gross exaggeration 
the prosecution applied to him literally the natural, necessary, general, and confidential 
criticisms  in  my  explanations  of  forty  years  previously  concerning  a  Hadith  which 
describes  his  errors,  after  his  death,  making  it  into  an  indictable  offence  for  us.  Can 
there  be  any  comparison  between  the  sake  or  memory  of  someone  who  is  dead  and 
gone  and  who  no  longer  has  any  connection  with  the  Government,  and  Almighty 
God’s laws of justice, which are a manifestation of His sovereignty? 

Also, freedom of conscience which, of the principles adopted by the Government 
of  the  Republic,  is  the  one  we  have most relied on and defended ourselves with, has 
been made something we have transgressed against, as though we are opposed to it. 

Also,  because  I  criticised  the  evils  and  faults  of  civilization,  unimaginable  things 
are  ascribed  to  me  in  the  police  reports:  as  though  I  do  not  accept  the  use  of  the 
radio,14 aeroplane and railway, they accuse me of being opposed to modern progress. 

                                             

13 It had formerly been a common practice to gather together in a single volume for constant 

reading Sura al-An‘am and other meritorious suras and verses from the Qur’an. [Tr.] 

14 I said that in order to offer supreme thanks for a supreme Divine bounty like the radio, it 
should “recite the Qur’an so that all the people on the face of the earth could listen to it, and the 
atmosphere might become a hâfiz of the Qur’an.” 

 

390

Making  a  comparison  with  these  examples,  God  willing,  like  the  just  and  fair 
Denizli  public  prosecutor,  Afyon  Court  will  show  how  contrary  to  justice  this 
treatment is, and will attach no importance to the delusions in those police reports. 

The  strangest  error  is  this:  in  one  place  I  said:  although  mankind  should  have 
responded with endless thanks to Almighty God’s supreme bounties of the aeroplane, 
railway,  and  radio,  they  did  not  respond  in  that  way,  so  He  rained  down  bombs  on 
their heads from the ’planes. The radio is also a supreme bounty, and thanks for it may 
be  shown  by  making  it  a  universal  reciter  of  the  Qur’an  with  millions  of  tongues, 
allowing  all  the  people  on  the  face  of  the  earth  to  listen  to  it.  Also,  I  said  when 
explaining in the Twentieth Word that the Qur’an makes predictions about the future 
wonders of civilization, that one of its verses indicates that the infidels will defeat the 
Islamic  world  with  the  railway.  Although  I  had  urged  Islam  to  lay  hold  of  these 
wonders,  some  of  the  prosecutors  in  previous  courts,  accused  us  of  being  against 
modern  progress,  and  made  the  aeroplane,  railway,  and  radio  the  basis  of  charges 
against us. 

Also,  although  it  is  completely  unrelated,  someone  said  about  the  name 
‘Risaletü’n-Nur,’  which  is  a  second  name  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  that  “it  is  a  message 
(risalet)  from  the  light  of  the  Qur’an,  that  is,  it  is  inspired  by  it,  and  is  an  heir 
performing the function of Divine messengership, of the Shari‘a.”  In another place in 
the indictment, it was given the wrong meaning and made the basis of other charges, 
as though I had said: “the Risale-i Nur is a Divine Messenger (resûl).” 

I  have  also  proved  with  decisive  arguments  in  twenty  places  in  my  defence 
speeches that even if it was for the whole world, we would not exploit either religion, 
or the Qur’an, or the Risale-i Nur, and they may not be exploited, and that we would 
not change one of their truths for rule over the whole world, and that is how we are in 
fact.  There  have  been  thousands  of  indications  of  what  I  claim  over  the  last  twenty 
years. But from the way the interrogations at Afyon are going, and its indictment, we 
are being accused due to other police reports of expending all our efforts on worldly 
intrigues,  and  hastening  to  the  hateful  games  of  this  world,  and  making  religion  the 
tool of lowly things and degrading its sacredness, and making these our aim. Since it is 
thus, with all my strength I say: For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of 
Affairs!  

                                                                                  S a i d  N u r s i  

 

391

In His Name, be He glorified! 

An Addendum to My Written Objections to the Charges 
Made Against Us by Afyon Court 

 [Those I address in this objection are  not the Afyon Prosecutor and Court, 
but  the  spiteful  and  suspicious  officials  who  due  to  the  false  and  defective 
reports  of  public  prosecutors  in  other  places  and  informers  and  detectives, 
have  turned  against  us  the  extraordinary  situation  here  and  in  the  office  of 
the examining magistrate.] 

Firstly: Just  how far from justice it is to call the Risale-i Nur students, who are 
innocent and have no connection with politics, a political society, which is completely 
baseless and never even occurred to us, and to accuse the unfortunates who embraced 
the  Risale-i  Nur  and  have  no  aim  other  than  belief  and  the  hereafter,  of  publishing 
works  for  that  society,  or  being  active  officers  or  members  of  it,  or  of  reading  the 
Risale-i Nur or teaching it to others, or of writing it out, thus deeming them guilty of 
some crime, and to send them to court — a proof of how far this is from justice is as 
follows:  

In  accordance  with  the  principles  of  freedom  of  thought  and  freedom  of 
scholarship,  those  who  read  the  harmful  works  written  to  oppose  the  Qur’an  by 
Doctor  Dozy  and  other  atheists  are  not  considered  to  have  committed  crimes,  yet 
those who have great need to learn the truths of the Qur’an and belief and long to do 
so,  and  read  and write  out  the  Risale-i  Nur,  which  teaches  those  truths as clearly as 
daylight,  are  considered  guilty  of  crimes.  Also,  they  based  their  allegations  on  a  few 
sentences  in  one  or  two  treatises  which  we  had  treated  as  confidential  before  they 
were  exhibited  in  court,  so  that  among  a  hundred  other  treatises  a  wrong  meaning 
should  not  be  given  them,  and  accusations  were  made  concerning  them.  However, 
with  the  exception  of  one  of  those  treatises,  Eskişehir  Court  scrutinized  them  and 
objected only to one or two matters in Treatise On Islamic Dress, and the exception is 
replied to extremely decisively in both my petition and my objections to the indictment; 
and  the  fact  that  “we  have  light  in  our  hands,  not  the  club  of  politics”  was  proved 
conclusively  from  twenty  angles  in  Eskişehir  Court;  and Denizli Court scrutinized all 
the treatises of the Risale-i Nur without exception and did not object to any of them. 
Nevertheless,  those  unfair  prosecutors  extended  those  three  or  four  sentences  to the 
whole Risale-i Nur, and just  

 

392

as  they  confiscated  the  four-hundred-page  Zülfikâr  because  of  two  pages,  so  they 
stated  those  who  read  and  write  out  the  Risale-i  Nur  were  guilty  of  a  crime  and 
accused  myself  of  contesting  the  Government.  I  call  on  those  close  to  me  and  the 
friends  who  meet  with  me  to  testify  that  for  more  than  ten  years,  apart  from  two 
leaders, one deputy, and the Governor of Kastamonu, I have have not known who the 
leaders  of  the  Government  were,  or  who  its  ministers,  commanders,  officials,  and 
deputies  were,  and  I  have  not  been  curious  to  find  out.  However,  one  or  two  years 
ago,  one  or  two persons displayed an interest in me and I learnt of five or six of the 
leading  members  of  the  Government.  Is  it  in  any  way  possible  for  someone  not  to 
know  the  people  he  is  contesting,  and  to  have  no  wish  to  know  them,  to  attach  no 
importance to learning whether they are friend or foe? It is understood from this that 
they dream up totally baseless pretexts to ruin me whatever happens. 

Since  that  is  the  case,  I  say  not  to  the  court  here  but  to  those  unjust  people:  I 
don’t give tuppence for your severest penalty; it has no importance whatsoever. For I 
am  seventy-five  years  old  and  have  one  foot  in  the  grave.  To  exchange  one  or  two 
years of innocent life of persecution for the rank of martyrdom would be the greatest 
happiness for me. Thanks to the thousands of proofs of the Risale-i Nur, I believe with 
the utmost certainty that for us death is our discharge papers. Even if outwardly it is 
execution, for us one hour’s distress would be the key to eternal happiness and mercy. 
But as for you, covert, cruel enemies who confuse the judiciary on account of atheism 
and preoccupy the Government with us for no reason! Be certain of this and tremble! 
For  you  are  being  condemned  to  eternal  annihilation  and  everlasting  solitary 
confinement. We see that our revenge is being taken on you in compounded fashion. 
We  pity  you  even.  Yes,  surely  the  reality  of  death,  which  has  emptied  this  town  a 
hundred times into the graveyard has demands greater than life. To find a way of being 
delivered  from  its  certain  execution  is  man’s  greatest  need,  more  important  than 
anything.  Those who on trite pretexts impute guilt to the Risale-i Nur students, who 
have found this way for themselves, and to the Risale-i Nur, which provides that way 
with  thousands  of  proofs,  —how  guilty  they  are  themselves  in  the  eyes  of truth  and 
justice even lunatics would understand. 

There  are  three  matters  which  deceive  these  unjust  people  and  give  rise  to  the 

delusion of a political society, which is completely irrelevant: 

The First: The fact that since early days my students have been fervently attached 

to me like brothers, has given rise to the erroneous impression of a society. 

 

393

The Second: Some of the Risale-i Nur students have acted as though they were an 
Islamic  group,  such  as  is  found  everywhere  and  is  permitted  by  the  laws  of  the 
Republic  and  is  not  harassed  by  it,  and  this  has  been  imagined  to  be  a  society.  But 
those limited three or four students have not intended any sort of political society, only 
to serve belief together sincerely as brothers and to support each other in working for 
the hereafter.  

The  Third:  Because  those  unfair  people  know  themselves  to  be  misguided  and 
overcome by love of this world, and because they find some of the Government’s laws 
convenient for themselves, they say to themselves: “Most probably Said and his friends 
oppose the Government’s laws, which suit our caprices, which are illicit in the eyes of 
civilization.  In  which  case, 
they  are  a  political  society  which  opposes  the 
Government.”  

So I say: You wretches! If the world was eternal, and man was going to remain in 
it  permanently,  and  his  only  duty  was  politics,  perhaps  there  would  have  been  some 
meaning in your slander. But if I had undertaken this work with a view to politics, you 
would  have  found  not  ten  sentences  in  a  hundred  treatises,  but  a  thousand,  to  be 
political and combative. If to suppose the impossible, like you, we had been working 
with all our strength for worldly aims and pleasures and politics, which not even Satan 
could make anyone accept, even if it had been thus, since these twenty years there has 
been  no  incident  in  which  we  were  involved,  and  the  Government  looks  not  to  the 
heart but to the hand, and all governments have fierce opponents, you cannot deem us 
guilty in the name of the law. My last word is 

God  suffices me, there is no god but He; in Him do I place my trust  — He 
the Sustainer of the Throne [of Glory] Supreme!15 

  

                                             

15 Qur’an, 9:129. 

 

394

[After our acquittal in Denizli Court I lived alone for three years and did not 
concern myself with politics. This new affair, which has resulted in our being 
sent to Afyon Prison, is therefore unlawful in ten ways, as I shall explain.] 

The  First:  Although  the  Risale-i  Nur  has  been  scrutinized  by  three  courts  and 
three committees of experts, and seven departments of government in Ankara and their 
legal  bodies,  and  although  all  the  treatises  were  unanimously  acquitted  without 
opposition, and Said and his seventy-five companions were all acquitted without being 
sentenced to a single day’s imprisonment, to again seize those treatises as though they 
were  pernicious  writings  is  totally  contrary  to  the  law,  as  anyone  the  slightest  bit 
reasonable would understand. 

The Second: A man who lived for three and a half years all alone and a stranger 
in  Emirdağ  after  having  been  acquitted,  with  his  door  locked  from  the  outside  and 
bolted  on  the  inside,  who  accepted  only  one  out  of  a  hundred  people  on  essential 
business, and even gave up the work of writing he  had  pursued for twenty years and 
wrote  no  more  —he  had  the  lock  on  his  door  smashed  by  detectives  for  political 
purposes and they broke in on him, but they could find nothing other than an  Arabic 
prayerbook  and  a  wall-hanging.  Anyone  with  even  a  grain  of  fairness  would 
understand how illegal it was to harass him in this way. 

The  Third:  As  he  said  in  court:  if  there  is  someone  who  as  is  confirmed  by 
seventy  witnesses,  for  seven  years  knew  nothing  of  the  Second  World  War  and  was 
not  curious  about  it  nor  asked  about  it,  and  now  for  ten  years  has  been  in  the  same 
state of mind, and for twenty-five years has read no newspaper nor listened to one, and 
for  thirty  years  has  said:  “I  seek  refuge  with  God  from  Satan  and  politics,”  and  has 
avoided politics with all his strength, and if in twenty-two years of the most tortuous 
distress,  in  order  not  to  attract  the  attention  of  politicians  or  become  involved  in 
politics, has not once applied to the Government to alleviate his conditions —if there 
is  such  a  person,  is  it  in  conformity  with  any  law  to  raid  his  place  of  seclusion  as 
though he was plotting political intrigues, and cause him unheard of suffering while he 
was ill? Anyone with an iota of conscience would pity him in that state! 

The Fourth: Eskişehir Court studied the Risale-i Nur for six months because we 
had been charged with organizing a political society and founding a sufi order, and due 
to that suspicion and because of the personal hatred towards us of the great leader it 
urged certain members of the judiciary to act against us, yet that court acquitted us of 
founding a  

 

395

political society and sufi order and the Risale-i Nur charges, and only making a pretext 
of  a  short  piece  called  Treatise  On  Islamic  Dress,  gave  sentences  of  six  months  to 
fifteen out of a  hundred students, not in accordance with the law but arbitrarily. And 
although until the investigations had been completed they remained in prison for four 
and a half months, that is, they served prison sentences of one and a half months, and 
ten years later Denizli Court again on a number of pretexts like organizing a political 
society and founding a sufi order, and after scrutinizing closely twenty years’ worth of 
letters and writings, sent five boxes of books to Ankara Criminal Court, and although 
those  books  and  letters  were  the  subject  of  two  years’  close  scrutiny  by  Ankara and 
Denizli  Courts,  they  passed  a  unanimous  decision  for  their  acquittal  concerning  the 
political society and sufi order16 and other pretexts, and returned all the books to their 
owners. They also acquitted Said and his companions. So anyone who has not lost his 
humanity will understand just how illegal it is to look on him as a political activist and 
accuse him of being a plotter, and to provoke the officers of the court against him. 

The Fifth: Because of the compassion which is the basis of  my way and that of 
the Risale-i Nur and for thirty years has been a principle by which I have lived, so that 
no  harm  comes  to  the  innocent  I  do  not  censure  the  tyrants  who  persecute  me,  let 
alone  cursing  them.  Even  when  angry  at  some  of  those  depraved  wretches  who 
oppress  me  out  of  vicious  hatred,  or  even  the  irreligious  tyrants,  my  compassion 
prevents me from responding with a curse, let alone physically. For those cruel tyrants 
have  parents  and  children;  I  do  nothing  to  them  so  that  no  material  harm  comes  to 
those four or five elderly unfortunates and innocents. Sometimes I even forgive them. 
It  is  because  of  this  compassion  that  I  absolutely  never  interfere  in  government  or 
disturb public order. Moreover, I have recommended this so strongly to all my friends 
that  some  of  the  fair-minded  police  of  three  provinces  have  admitted  that  “these 
Risale-i  Nur  students  are  police  of  a  sort;  they  preserve  order  and  maintain  public 
security.”  There  are  thousands  of  witnesses  to  this  fact,  and  they  have  confirmed  it 
through twenty years’ experience and thousands of students have corrob 

                                             

16 The basis and aim of the Risale-i Nur is certain belief and the essential reality of the Qur’an. 

For this reason, three courts of law have acquitted it in regard to being a tarikat. Furthermore, not one 
person has said during these twenty years: “Said has given me tarikat [instruction].” Also, a way to 
which for a thousand years most of this nation’s forefathers have been bound may not made 
something for which [the members of the nation] are answerable. Also, those who combat 
successfully those covert dissemblers who attach the name of tarikat to the reality of Islam and attack 
this nation’s religion, may not themselves be accused of being a tarikat. As for a society or 
community, it is a fraternity which look to the hereafter within Islamic brotherhood. It is not a 
political society, as three courts have ruled. They have acquitted it in that respect. 

 

396

orated  it  by  never  having  been  involved  in  any  incident  recorded  by  the  police,  so 
which  law  permits  that  unhappy  man’s  house  to  be  raided  as  though  he  were  a 
revolutionary  and  ‘komitadji’,  and  for  pitiless  men  to  insult  him,  and  despite  not 
finding anything in his house, as though he was a multiple criminal gather up his most 
precious,  miraculous  Qur’an  and  the  inscriptions  hanging  on  his  wall  as  though  they 
were pernicious writings? What benefit demands turning thousands of religious people 
who  thus  serve  public  order  with  their  good  morals  against  government  and  public 
order because of some baseless suspicion? 

The Sixth: Endless thanks be to God that thirty years ago, through His grace and 
the effulgence of the Qur’an, a person realized just how valueless and meaningless are 
the  fleeting  fame  and  glory  of  this  world,  and  its  egotistical  self-admiration  and 
celebrity,  and  since  that  time  has  struggled  with  all  his  strength  against  his  evil-
commanding soul, and to be self-effacing and give up egotism, and not to be artificial 
and hypocritical. Those who have served him or befriended him are perfectly certain of 
this and testify to it. For twenty years he has fled with all his might from people’s good 
opinions and their attention, which everyone takes too much pleasure in, and contrary 
to  everyone  else  has  rejected  praise  and  acclaim  and being accorded a spiritual rank. 
He has also rejected the excessively good opinions of him of his closest brothers, and 
has wounded their feelings by not accepting the praise and commendation expressed in 
their letters. He has show himself to be devoid of virtue, and has ascribed all virtue to 
the Risale-i Nur, a Qur’anic commentary, and hence to the collective personality of the 
Risale-i Nur students, thinking of himself as only a lowly servant. This proves that he 
has not tried to make himself liked, and he has not wanted to and has rejected it. So 
under  what  law  has  he  been  deemed  guilty  because  without  his  consent  some  of  his 
friends  in  a  distant  place  had  an  excessively  good  opinion  of  him  and  eulogized  him 
and  awarded  him  a  high  spiritual  rank;  and  because  of  what  a  preacher  said  in  the 
region  of  Kütahya  whom  he  does  not  know;  and  because  of  a  letter  with  a  forged 
signature  which  had  been  sent  to  Kütahya,  where  I  have  never  sent  any  letter;  and 
because of an offensive book in Balikesir, the author of which is unknown? Would any 
law  in  the  world  permit  sending  officials  to  break  the  lock  of  a  wretched,  aged,  ill 
stranger’s room as though he had committed a serious crime, and allow them to justify 
this  by  finding  only  a  book  of  supplications  and  a  wall-hanging?  Would  any  politics 
allow such aggression? 

The  Seventh:  Would  any  law  permit  for  an  unfortunate  who,  although  at  this 
time  inside  the  country  when  there  are  so  many  lively  political  parties  and  currents, 
internal and external, and the ground is ripe to take  

 

397

advantage of this, that is, to win numerous diplomats  and  politicians as supporters in 
place of his handful of friends, told all his friends, solely in order not to get involved in 
politics,  nor  damage  his  sincerity,  nor  attract  the  government’s  attention  to  himself, 
nor to become preoccupied with the world: “Beware! Don’t get carried away by those 
political  currents!  Don’t  get  involved  in  politics!  Don’t  disturb  public  order!”;  and 
although two currents caused him harm and distress because he withdrew in this way, 
the old one because of its groundless fears, and the new, because it says he does not 
help it — despite all this he never interfered in the worldly’s world and was busy with 
his life in the hereafter, and wrote not even one letter in twenty-two years to his own 
brother in the village of Nurs in his native region, nor ten letters in twenty years to his 
friends  in  those  provinces  —  so  which  law  permits  that  anyone  intervenes  to  this 
extent with his preoccupation with the hereafter? 

Would  any  law  permit  collecting  up  copies  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  in  which  three 
courts  of  law  have  found  nothing  indictable,  although  under  the  liberty  laws  the 
publications  of  those  without  religion  and  the  communists  are  not  interfered  with 
despite  being  extremely  harmful  for  the  country  and  nation  and  morality.  For  the 
Risale-i  Nur  has  been  striving  for  twenty  years  to  maintain  the  country  and  nation’s 
social  life  and  morality  and security; and has been effectively struggling to regain for 
this nation its true support, the Islamic world’s brotherhood and its friendship, and to 
strengthen these; and the parts of the Risale-i Nur like Zülfikâr and The Staff of Moses 
(Âsâ-yi  Mûsa),  which  having  been  studied  for  three  months  by  the  Directorate  of 
Religious Affairs on the orders of the Minister for Internal Affairs for the purpose of 
having it criticized, fully appreciated its value and had it put in the Department library 
as “an important work;” and The Staff of Moses, which was placed on the tomb of the 
Prophet  Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him),  as  a  sign  of  its  acceptance 
was seen there by the Hajjis. Would any law, conscience, or justice permit these to be 
collected up as though they were injurious papers and sent to court? 

The  Eighth:  Then  a  person  who  although he was given complete freedom after 
twenty-two years of distressing and unjustified exile, did not return to his native region 
where  he  had  thousands  of  friends  and  relations,  but  preferred  solitude  and  exile  so 
that he should have no contact with social life and politics; and who gave up the very 
meritorious congregation of the mosque in preferance to performing the prayers on his 
own and remaining in his room; that is, his state of mind made him avoid the people’s 
adulation; and as is testified to by twenty years of his life and confirmed by thousands 
of valuable Turks, preferred one pious Turk to numer 

 

398

ous  negligent  Kurds,  and  who  even  proved  in  court  that  he  would  not  exchange  a 
hundred  negligent  Kurds  for  one  Turkish  brother  with powerful belief like Hafiz Ali; 
and who in order not to be the object of their respect and veneration, never met with 
people so long as it was not essential and did not go to the mosque; and for forty years 
has worked with all his strength and all his works for Islamic brotherhood and so that 
Muslims  would  love  one  another;  and  who,  since  the  Turkish  nation  is  the  Qur’an’s 
standard-bearer  and  is  praised  by  the  Qur’an,  has  great  love  for  that  nation  and  has 
passed  his  life  among  its  people  —in  order  to  insult  this  person  with  the  tongue  of 
officialdom  and  make  propaganda  and  scare  away  his  friends,  the  former  governor 
said: “He is a Kurd and you are Turks. He is a Shafi‘i and you are Hanafi’s,” trying to 
frighten  everyone  into  abandoning  him.  And  although  over  twenty  years  and  in  two 
courts he was not forced to change his manner of dress, and the army peaked cap was 
modified,  a  brimmed  hat  was  forcibly  placed  on  the  head  of  that  recluse  —  what 
benefit is there is all this? What law permits it? 

The Ninth: is very important,17 and very powerful, but it touches on politics so I 

am remaining silent. 

The Tenth: This is an attack, which no law permits, and is without advantage, and 
is only making mountains out of molehills due to some meaningless delusion, and is no 
part  of  any  law.  Concerning  this  too  I  am  remaining  silent  so  as  not  to  touch  on 
politics, which according to our way we are unconcerned with.  

In the face of treatment which is thus illegal in ten ways, all we say is For us God 

suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs! 

                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i 

                                             

17 The fact that there were Christians and Jews in Islamic governments, and Muslims in 

Christian and Zoroastrian governments shows that opponents who do disturb public order or interfere 
in government cannot be legally interfered with. Moreover, one is not answerable for possibilities. 
Otherwise everyone would have to be sent to court and tried because of ‘possibility’, for everyone 
might kill other people. 

 

399

I have a few more points I want to submit to 
the authorities of Afyon, and to its Court and Police 

The First: Most of the prophets appearing in the East and in Africa, and most of 
the  philosophers  emerging  in  the  West  and  in  Europe  is  a sign  of  pre-eternal  Divine 
Determining  that  in  Asia  religion  is  dominant  and  philosophy  is  in  second  place.  In 
consequence,  even  if  those  ruling  in  Asia  are  not  religious,  they  should  not  interfere 
with those who work for religion; they should encourage them. 

The  Second:  The  All-Wise  Qur’an  is  the  intellect  and  power  of  thought  of  the 
head  of  the  earth.  If,  I  seek  refuge  with  God,  the  Qur’an  were  to  depart  from  the 
globe,  the  globe  would  go  mad.  It  is  not  far  from  reason  to  suppose  that  another 
planet colliding with its head emptied of reason, would cause doomsday to erupt. Yes, 
the  Qur’an  is  a  chain,  a  ‘rope  of  God,’  binding  the  earth  to  the  Divine  Throne.  It 
preserves  the  earth  more  than  gravity.  Thus,  the  Risale-i  Nur,  which  is  a  true  and 
powerful  commentary  on  the  Qur’an  of  Mighty  Stature,  is  a  supreme  Divine  bounty 
which  has  been  demonstrating  its  effectiveness  for  twenty  years  in  this  century,  an 
insuppressible  miracle  of  the  Qur’an.  The  Government  therefore  should  not  be 
interfering  in  it  and  trying  to  scare  its  students  away  from  it,  but  protecting  it  and 
encouraging people to read it. 

The  Third:  In  Denizli  Court  I  said  the  following  in  connection  with  all  the 
believers assisting  with prayers for forgiveness those  who have departed for the past, 
and their bequeathing good works on their spirits: 

When  you  are  asked  by  millions  of  believing  plaintiffs  at  the  Supreme  Tribunal: 
“Why  did  you  want  to  ruin  with  imprisonment  and  persecution  the  Risale-i  Nur 
students, who were striving to save the country and nation from anarchy and irreligion 
and  immorality  and  their  compatriots  from  eternal  annihilation,  although  because  of 
the  liberty  laws  you looked tolerantly on the publications of atheists and communists 
and political societies that produce anarchists, and did not bother them?” What answer 
will you and those who want to convict and ruin the Risale-i Nur students, who serve 
the truths of the Qur’an, give? I am asking you the same thing! I said that to them and 
those  just  and  fair-minded  people  acquitted  us,  demonstrating  the  fairness  of  the 
judicial system. 

The  Fourth:  I  was  expecting  to  be  taken  for  interrogation  to  a  place  of 
consultation,  in  either  Ankara  or  Afyon,  where  questions  would  be  asked  and 
answered about matters of overriding importance and the Risale-i  

 

400

Nur’s  relation  to  them.  Yes,  matters  connected  with  finding  ways  of  restoring  the 
brotherhood,  love,  and  good  will  of  three  hundred  and  fifty  million  Muslims  for  this 
nation  and  country,  and  their  moral  assistance  for  it.  An  indication  that  the  Risale-i 
Nur is the most effective means of achieving this is the following: 

In Mecca this year, a scholar of great eminence translated the main collections of 
the Risale-i Nur into both one of the Indian languages and Arabic, and sending them 
to India and Arabia, said: “Just as he strives through the Risale-i Nur to secure unity 
and  Islamic  brotherhood,  our  most  powerful  support,  so  he  demonstrates  that  the 
Turkish nation is always progressive in religion and belief.” 

I was also expecting that momentous questions would be asked like “What is the 
extent of the service the Risale-i Nur can provide in the face of the danger communism 
poses  to this country, because it turns into anarchy? How can this blessed country be 
defended  against  this  terrible  torrent?”  It  should  have  been  thus,  but  having  been 
blown  up  out of all proportion due to the petty and  personal slander of the spiteful, 
matters  holding  not  the  slightest  importance  and  which  are  in  no  way  crimes,  were 
discussed,  which  caused  me  distress  in  these  serious  conditions,  the  like  of  which  I 
have never before suffered in my life. Meaningless questions were asked about one or 
two minor personal matters which three previous courts had previously examined then 
acquitted. 

The  Fifth:  The  Risale-i  Nur  cannot  be  contested  or  defeated.  It  has  been 
silencing  the most obdurate philosophers for twenty years. It demonstrates the truths 
of  belief  as  clearly  as  the  sun.  Those  who  rule  this  country  should  profit  from  its 
strength. 

The  Sixth:  Destroying  my  unimportant  character because of my personal faults, 
and  through  contemptuous  treatment  poisoning  public  opinion  about  me  does  not 
harm the Risale-i Nur, in fact it strengthens it in some ways. For in place of my mortal 
tongue are the undying tongues of a hundred thousand copies of the Risale-i Nur, and 
they  cannot  be  silenced;  they  will  speak  out.  And  as  they  have  up  to  now,  the 
thousands  of  powerful  tongues  of  its  sincere  students  will  continue  that  sacred, 
universal service till the end of the world, God willing. 

The  Seventh:  As  I  stated  in  the  previous  trials  putting  forward  the  proofs,  our 
enemies  and  those  who  oppose  us  both  officially  and  unofficially,  deceiving  the 
Government, making some of its leading members suspicious about us and causing the 
judiciary  to  move  against  us,  are  either  seriously  deceived or  have  been  deceived  by 
others, or are exceedingly treacherous revolutionaries working on account of anarchy, 
or cun 

 

401

ning  atheists  struggling  against  Islam  and  the  truths  of  the  Qur’an  on  account  of 
apostasy. Calling absolute despotism “the Republic” in order to attack us, and making 
the regime a screen to absolute apostasy, and calling absolute dissipation “civilization,” 
and  calling  arbitrary  compulsion  on  account  of  disbelief  “the  law,”  they  have  both 
ruined us, and deceived the Government, and preoccupied the judiciary with us for no 
reason. Referring them to the wrath of the All-Compelling and Glorious One, we take 
refuge in the citadel of For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs so 
as to defend ourselves against their evil. 

The  Eighth:  Last  year  the  Russians  sent  numerous  people  to  make  the  Hajj  as 
propaganda  in  order  to  show  that  they  are  more  respectful  towards  the  Qur’an  than 
other  nations  and,  because  of  religion,  to  try  to  turn  the  Islamic  world  against  the 
religious  people  of  this  country.  But  the  main  collections  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  were 
being spread at that time in both Mecca, and Medina, and Damascus, and Egypt, and 
Aleppo,  attracting  the  appreciation  of  the  religious  scholars,  which  both  negated  the 
communist  propaganda,  and  showed  to  the  Islamic  world  that  like  formerly  the 
Turkish  nation  and  its  brothers  are  supporting  religion  and  the  Qur’an  and  are  the 
elder brothers of the other peoples of Islam and their heroic commander in the service 
of  the  Qur’an.  Those  collections  from  the  Risale-i  Nur  demonstrated  this  in  those 
sacred centres. Will it not the bring the earth to anger if this valuable national service 
of the Risale-i Nur is responded to with torments in this way? 

The Ninth is a brief summary of a matter that was proved and elucidated in my 

defence in Denizli. 

If  through  his  genius  and  intelligence  a  great  military  commander  arrogates  to 
himself all the positive virtues  of the army and ascribes to the army his own negative 
evils, the courageous actions and virtues of the soldiers, which equal them in number, 
will  be  reduced  to  one,  while  the  commander’s  evils  will  be  equal  in  number  to  the 
soldiers, which is an awesome wrong and contrary to the truth. This being so, I said to 
the public prosecutor in our previous trials, who was attacking me because of the slap 
a Hadith I expounded forty years earlier dealt that person: “It’s true I’m offending him 
due  to  predictions  made  by  Hadiths,  but  I’m  also  defending  the  army’s  honour  and 
preserving  him  from  serious  error.  As  for  you,  for  the  sake  of  one  single  friend  of 
yours,  you  are  affronting  the  honour  of  the  army,  which  is  the  Qur’an’s  standard-
bearer  and  an  heroic  commander  of  the  Islamic  world.”  God  willing,  the  prosecutor 
saw the matter more fairly and was saved from his error. 

The Tenth: It is because in the administration of justice the essence of  

 

402

the  rights  of  everyone  who  applies  have  to  preserved  without 
justice  and 
discrimination  and  the  duty  of  those  involved  is  to  work  solely  for the sake of right, 
that during his caliphate, Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) sat together with a 
Jew in court and they were tried together. On another occasion, a just judge saw that 
an  official  was  angry  with  a  delinquent  thief  when  he  was  cutting  off  his  hand  as 
demanded  by  the  law.  He  immediately  sacked  the  official,  and  full  of  regret  said: 
“Those  who  up  to  now  have  been  influenced  by  their  feelings  in  this  way  while 
executing the law have perpetrated great wrongs.” Yes, even if in executing the law he 
does not pity the convicted man, he may not be angry; if he is, he is acting tyrannically. 
If  he  carries  out  capital  punishment  angrily,  even  if  it  is  in  retaliation  (qisas),  he 
becomes a sort of murderer.” 

Thus,  in  courts  of  law  it  is  this  pure,  unbiased  truth  which  rules.  But  although 
three courts have acquitted us, and perhaps if they knew, ninety per cent of this nation 
would testify that the Risale-i Nur students are harmless and beneficial for nation and 
country,  the  students  are  being  angrily  and  contemptuously  mistreated,  despite being 
innocent and much in need of consolation and the indulgence of the law. But since we 
have decided to meet with patience and forbearance every calamity and insult, we are 
silent, referring it to God and saying: “Perhaps there is some good in this.” However, I 
was afraid that these innocent unfortunates being treated in this way due to unfounded 
suspicions  and  the  malicious  reports  of  informers  would  lead  to  the  visitation  of 
disaster, and I was therefore obliged to write this. Anyway, if there is any fault in this 
matter, it is mine. These unfortunates assisted me solely seeking God’s pleasure and to 
save their religious belief and lives in the hereafter. For them to receive such treatment 
when they were deserving of praise and appreciation, is enough to make anyone angry. 
Moreover, it is amazing, but again they are making unsupported assertions about 
a political society. However, both three courts have scrutinized this aspect of the case 
and  acquitted  us,  and  neither  the  courts,  nor  the  police,  nor  the  experts’  committees 
have  discovered  any  sign  of  any  society  that  could  justify  such  an  accusation:  the 
Risale-i Nur students are a brotherhood which looks to the hereafter, like the students 
of  a  teacher,  or  university  students,  or  the  students  of  a  Qur’an  teacher  who  is 
teaching  them  to  memorize  the  Qur’an.  Those  who  have  made  charges against  them 
calling  them a political society, have to look on all tradesmen, preachers, and school-
children  as  belonging  to  such  societies.  I  therefore  see  no  necessity  to  defend  those 
imprisoned here as a result of such meaningless and baseless charges.  

 

403

However, there is nothing at all to prevent me defending the Risale-i Nur with the 
same facts that I have defended it with three times previously, for it closely concerns 
both  this  country  and  the  Islamic  world,  and  it  is  the  beneficial  cause  of  plenty  and 
blessings,  material  and  spiritual,  for  this  nation  and  country.  No  law  or  politics 
prohibits this or could prohibit it. 

Yes, we are a society, but we a society which every century has three hundred and 
fifty million members. Every day with the obligatory prayers, its members demonstrate 
five  times  with  perfect  veneration  their  attachment  to  the  principles  of  that  sacred 
society,  and  their  wish  to  serve  it.  In  accordance  with  the  sacred  programme  of 
Indeed, the believers are brothers,18 they hasten with their supplications and spiritual 
gains  to  assist  one  another.  Yes,  we  are  members  of  that holy and vast society. And 
our  particular  duty  is  to  convey  in  confirmatory  form  to  the  people  of  belief  the 
Qur’anic  truths  of  faith,  and  save  them  and  ourselves  from  eternal  annihilation  and 
perpetual  solitary  confinement  in  the  Intermediate  Realm.  We  have  absolutely  no 
connection  with  any  worldly,  political,  plotting  society,  political  or  revolutionary,  as 
has  been imputed to  us; we do not condescend  to any such meaningless, purposeless 
secret  society.  In  any  event,  four  courts  of  law  have  investigated  this  down  to  the 
finest details, and then acquitted us concerning it. 

                                                                       S a i d  N u r s i  

                                             

18 Qur’an, 49:10. 

 

404

My written objections, which form a supplement and addition 
to my defence, and were sent to six departments of government in 
Ankara, and presented to Afyon Criminal Court 

I  say  this  to  Afyon  Court:  Enough  now! My  patience  is  exhausted!  It  is  a  cruel 
and unprecedented wrong that in addition to having harassed me for twenty-two years 
without reason by holding me under constant surveillance in exile in total isolation and 
solitary confinement, to have illegally imprisoned the Risale-i Nur students three times 
and caused us loss of hundreds of thousands of liras because of unfounded suspicions 
and utilizing ‘possibilities’ instead of facts. And this, in spite of the fact that other than 
two or three matters six courts have been unable to find anything contrary to the law 
in the hundred parts of the Risale-i Nur. The future and its generations will curse the 
tyrants who have been responsible for it. Up to now I have found consolation since it 
is  my  conviction  that  they  will  condemn  them  and  cast  them  down  to  the  depths  of 
Hell at the Last Judgement, and holding my silence I have endured it. Otherwise, we 
could have defended our rights to the full. 

Six  courts  over  fifteen  years  have  scrutinized  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  our 
correspondence,  and  five  of  them  in  effect  acquitted  us  on  all  points.  Only  Eskişehir 
Court  made  a  pretext  of  five  or  ten  words  in  the  short  treatise  about  the  veiling  of 
women,  a single  matter,  and  gave  a  light  sentence  under  a  ‘flexible’  law.  When  they 
did  this,  I  wrote  the  following  in  the  correction  which  after  the  Appeal  Court  I  sent 
officially to Ankara as the sole example of illegality: 

A  long  time  ago,  following  the  consensus  and  rulings  of  three  hundred  and  fifty 
thousand Qur’anic commentaries, I expounded the Qur’anic verses about the veiling of 
women,  which  for  one  thousand  three  hundred  and  fifty  years  have  taught  and 
enjoined  a  powerful,  perpetual Islamic practice and sacred principle of three hundred 
and fifty million people, in order to defend them against an atheist’s objections and his 
criticisms  of  Qur’anic  civilization.  If  there  is  any  justice  in  the  world,  the  Court  will 
surely  quash  the  conviction  of  someone  and  the  sentence  passed  on  him  for 
expounding  the  verses,  since  he  was  following  the  way  taken  by  our  forefathers  for 
one  thousand  three  hundred  and  fifty  years;  it  will  surely  remove  this  extraordinary 
stain from the legal establishment of this Islamic State.  

I wrote this in the addendum containing my corrections and showed it  

 

405

to the public prosecutor. He was horrified and said: “There is no need for this. Your 
sentence was short and only a small part of it remains. There is no need to send this.” 

Thus, you have understood the truly strange examples like this one in my defence 
and objection, which has been presented to you and the departments of government in 
Ankara. What I seek and hope from Afyon Court is this: I await from you in the name 
of  true  justice  that  you  decide  on  the  complete  freedom  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  whose 
service and effulgence profits the nation and country as much as an army. Otherwise, I 
have  to  inform  you  that  when  the  five  or  ten  of  my  friends  who  were  sent  to prison 
because  of  their  relations  with  me  are  released,  I  have  the  idea  of  committing  some 
offence  which  will  necessitate  the  heaviest  penalty,  compelling  me  to  bid  farewell  to 
this life. It is like this: 

Although for the good of the country and nation, the Government should give me 
full protection and assist me, the fact that it is pressurizing me suggests that part of the 
communist organization and the secret atheistic society that have been working against 
me these last forty years, with which it has now combined, have both gained control of 
important positions, and are opposing me. It worries me, for there are numerous signs 
that the Government either does not know of this, or it is permitting it. 

Chairman  of  the  Court!  With  your  permission,  I  shall  ask  you  a  question  about 
which  I  am  extremely  curious:  why,  although  I  have  in  no  way  been  involved  in 
politics, have the politicians deprived me of all civil rights, all liberties, and even all the 
rights  of  life?  And  why  have  they  forbidden  my  very  careful  brothers  and  loyal 
assistants to have any contact with me, who tried to protect me against those plans to 
assassinate me while I was being held for three and a half months in total isolation, and 
to defend me against my covert enemies who have poisoned me eleven times, and have 
even  prevented  me,  although  I  am  elderly,  alone,  in  exile,  and  ill,  from  studying  my 
blessed, harmless books, which I always had with me? 

I  pleaded  with  the  public  prosecutor  to  give  me  my  books,  but  he  did  not  give 
them although he promised. They compelled me to remain alone in a huge, locked, and 
freezing ward with nothing to  occupy myself,  and  instead of the officials and menials 
concerned  being  friendly  and  comforting,  they quite simply encouraged them to look 
on  me  hostilely.  A  small  example  is  this:  I  wrote  a  petition  to  the  prison  governor, 
public prosecutor, and chairman of the court, and sent it to one of my brothers to write 
out since I do not know the new letters. It was written and was given to them. Then, 
as though I had committed some heinous crime, they nailed  

 

406

up  my  windows.  The  smoke  from  the  stove  was  a  great  discomfort  to  me,  and  I 
insisted  that  they  left  one  window  open.  Now  they  have  nailed  that  up  too.  Also, 
although  according  to  prison  practice,  solitary  confinement  usually  lasts  around  a 
fortnight, I was in total isolation for three and a half months and they did not allow any 
of  my  friends  to  have  any  contact  with  me.  Also,  three  months  ago  a  forty-page 
indictment was written against me, and they showed it to me. But I do not know the 
new letters, and I was ill, and my own writing is very poor, so I pleaded with them to 
let two of my students come, who know my language, and could read the indictment 
and write out my objections to it. But they did not permit it. They said: “The defence 
lawyer should come and read it.” Then they did not permit him either. Only, they told 
one of my brothers to write it out in the old letters and give it to me. But it would take 
six or seven days to write out those forty pages. To make the hour’s work of reading 
me  the  indictment  stretch  over  six  or  seven  days,  just  so  that  no  one  should  have 
contact  with  me,  is  appalling  repression  and  deprives  me  of  my  right  of  defence 
entirely.  A  multiple  murderer  condemned  to  be  hanged  does  not  receive  such 
treatment.  I  truly  suffer  extreme  distress  since  I  know  of  no  reason  for  this 
unprecedented  torment.  I  heard  that  the  Chairman  of  the  Court  is  fair-minded  and 
kind. I have therefore for the first and last time written this petition and complaint. 

                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i , 
                                                          who is ill, wretched, and in total isolation. 

* * * 

The Indictment contains four basic points concerning me 

First  Point:  I  consider  myself  to  be  a  regenerator  of  religion,  as  though  I  was 

proud and self-seeking. 

I reject this with all my strength. Moreover, all my brothers will testify that I have 
never  accepted  anyone’s  suggestion  that  I  was the Mahdi. In fact, when  the experts’ 
committee of Denizli Court said “If Said was to declare himself Mahdi, all his students 
would  accept  it,”  Said  stated  in  his  objections,  saying:  “I  am  not  a  Sayyid,  and  the 
Mahdi will be a Sayyid,” thus refuting them. 

Second Point: Publishing things secretly. 
Our  covert  enemies  should  not  misconstrue  things,  for  there  is  nothing  that 
touches  on  politics  and  public  order.  Also,  they  should  not  make  the  duplicating 
machine  and  the  old  letters  a  pretext.  Six  courts  of  law  and  various  departments  of 
government in Ankara understood the blow dealt  

 

407

by  the  Risale-i  Nur19  20at  Mustafa  Kemal,  and  they  did  not  bother  about  it  and 
acquitted us, returning all our books to us including the Fifth Ray. Moreover, his bad 
deeds  were  pointed  out  in  order  to  preserve  the  army’s  worth.  One  person  was 
disliked in order to affectionately praise the army. 

The Third: “He encourages the breaching of public security.” This extraordinary 
accusation is refuted by the facts that over a period of twenty years six courts and the 
police  of  ten  provinces  have  not  recorded  a single instance when any of the hundred 
thousand Nurju’s and hundred thousand copies of parts of the  Risale-i Nur breached 
public security or disturbed public order, and they have not found any such thing. It is 
meaningless  to  reply  to  a  few  unimportant  matters  in  this  new  indictment,  for  three 
courts  of  law  have  acquitted  us  on  these  very  points  and  they  have  been  replied  to 
repeatedly. Since charging us with these matters is the equivalent of charging Ankara 
Criminal Court and the Courts of Denizli and Eskişehir, which acquitted us concerning 
them, I leave it to them to reply. But there are two or three further matters. 

The  First:  Although  it was studied for two  years in the closest detail by Denizli 
and  Ankara  Criminal  Courts  and  they  acquitted  us  and  returned  the  book,  this 
Indictment  applies  one  or  two  matters  in  the Fifth Ray  to a commander who is dead 
and gone and shows them to be indictable offences. So we say: absolutely no law can 
deem it an offence to make a fair, general criticism which might be made applicable to 
a person who dead and gone and has no connection with the Government. 

Manipulating  the  facts,  the  prosecution  has  taken  one  aspect  of  that  general 
interpretation and applied it to that commander. No law can consider it a crime if one 
hundredth of a meaning which may be understood as referring to someone is found in 
a confidential and private treatise. Moreover, the treatise expounds allegorical Hadiths 
in wondrous fashion.  

                                             

19 The wrong meaning has been given in the Indictment, for it has deemed an offence some 
instances of the Risale-i Nur’s ‘wonder-working’ (kerâmet) which took the form of ‘slaps’. As though 
disasters like the earthquakes that occur when the Risale-i Nur is attacked are blows dealt by the 
Risale-i Nur. God forbid! We never said such a thing, nor wrote it. What we said in many places 
supported by proof was that like acceptable almsgiving, the Risale-i Nur is a means of repulsing 
disasters. Whenever it is attacked, it hides itself; then calamities seize the opportunity and assault us. 
Yes, confirmed by thousands of Risale-i Nur students and what they have observed, supported by 
hundreds of incidents and events and their ‘coincidences’,20 which in no way could have been 
attributed to chance, as well as numerous indications and ‘coincidences’ of the Qur’an, some of which 
were even pointed out in court, I have formed the certain conviction that those ‘coincidences’ are a 
Divine bestowal indicating the Risale-i Nur’s acceptability and are a sort of wonder of the Risale-i 
Nur on account of the Qur’an. 

20 ‘Coincidences’ (tevâfukat): the unintentional correspondence of words or letters in lines or 

patterns on one or several pages, or the ‘coinciding’ of apparently unrelated events. [Tr.] 

 

408

Since those explanations were written thirty or forty years ago, and decisive answers 
have  been  given  in  my  defence  and  objections,  which  have  been  presented  to  three 
other courts besides yours, and to six departments of government in Ankara, and have 
received no criticism, surely it cannot be considered to be at variance with any law if 
explanations of the Hadith’s true meaning turn out to fit a faulty individual. 

Also, the merits of the reforms in which that person had a part, the faults of which 
he was the cause, are not only his, they are also the army’s and the government’s. He 
only had a share of them. Just as it is surely not a crime to criticize him for his faults, 
so it cannot be said it is attacking the reforms. Also could it possibly be a crime not to 
like  someone who turned the Aya Sophia Mosque into a house of idols —despite its 
being  an  eternal  source  of  this  heroic  nation’s  honour,  and  shining  like  a  jewel  in  its 
jihad and service of the Qur’an, and being a vast and precious souvenir of the nation’s 
swords—  and  who  also  transformed  the  Shaykh  al-Islam’s  Office  into  a  girls’  high 
school? 

The Second Matter with which I am charged in the Indictment:  
Three courts of law have acquitted  me on this matter;  and as I pointed out forty 
years  ago  when  elucidating  the  wondrous  interpretation  of  a  Hadith,  the  Shaykh  al-
Islam  of  men  and  jinn,  Zembilli  ‘Ali  Efendi,  stated:  “It  is  not  permissible  to  put  a 
brimmed  hat on one’s head, even  as a joke,” and all the Shaykh al-Islams and all the 
Islamic  ‘ulama  considered  it  impermissible.  The  mass  of  Muslims  were  therefore  in 
danger when they were forced to wear such hats (that is, they either had to renounce 
their  religion  or  rebel);  but  since  in  one  section  of  the  Fifth  Ray,  which  was  written 
forty  years  ago,  it  says  “The  wearing  of  the  brimmed  hat  will  be  enforced,  and 
prostration  in  prayer  will  be  forbidden.  But the faith in the heads of those wearing it 
will  make  the  hat  prostrate,  God  willing,  making  it  Muslim,”  it  saved  the  mass  of 
Muslims both from rebellion and revolt, and from voluntarily renouncing their religion 
and  belief;  and  although  no  law  at  all  can  propose  such  a  thing  to  those  living  in 
seclusion;  and  in  twenty  years  none  of  six  provincial  authorities  have  forced  me  to 
wear  it;  and  officials  in  their  offices  and  women  and  children  and  people  in  the 
mosques  and  the  majority  of  villagers  are  not  compelled  to  wear  it;  and  it  has  now 
been  officially  taken  off  the  soldiers’  heads;  and  in  many  provinces  now  berets  and 
knitted  hats  are  not  prohibited;  nevertheless,  it  has  been  put  forward  as  a  reason  for 
the  conviction  of  myself and my brothers. Could any law in the world, any principle, 
any good, consider this completely meaningless charge to be a crime? 

 

409

The Third Matter with which I am charged: 
Incitement to breach public security in Emirdağ. My objection to this is as follows: 
Firstly  is  my irrefutable list of objections, which has been presented to the court 
here and to six departments of government in Ankara with this court’s knowledge and 
permission. I am now stating it exactly in answer to the indictment. 

Secondly:  As  is  testified  to  by  all  those  who  met  with  me  in  Emirdağ  and  is 
confirmed  by  its  people  and  police,  in  my  solitude  I  avoided  involvement  in  politics 
with  all  my  power.  I  even  gave  up  writing  and  corresponding  with  others.  I  wrote 
nothing  apart  from  two  pieces,  one  on  repetition  in  the  Qur’an,  the  other  about  the 
angels. And I used to write one letter a week to one place to encourage people in the 
Risale-i  Nur.  In  fact,  in  three  years  I  wrote  only  three  or  four  letters  to  my  own 
brother, who is a Mufti and for twenty years was with me as my student, and was very 
anxious  about  me,  and  sent  me  congratulations  for  the  religious  festivals.  And 
although for twenty years I have not written once to my brother  who is in my native 
region,  I  am  accused  in  the  indictment  of  breaching  security,  and  once  again,  of 
“opposing the reforms.” In reply I say this: 

The  fact  that  in  twenty  years  six  courts  of  law  and  the  police  of  ten  provinces 
connected with the matter have not recorded any incident involving the disturbance of 
public  order  and  breaching  of  security  in  connection  with  the  twenty  thousand  or 
perhaps  a  hundred  thousand  people  who  enthusiastically  read  the  twenty  thousand 
copies of the Risale-i Nur, shows that it looks on a single possibility out of thousands 
as being established fact. But if there is no sign of anything concerning one possibility 
out  of  two  or  three,  there  can  be  no  crime.  And  it  is  not  one  possibility  out  of 
thousands, but everyone including the prosecutor who attacks me, could kill numerous 
people;  they  could  disturb  public  peace  and  order  on  account  of  communism,  and 
breach  security.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  contempt  of  court  and  the  law  to  put  forward 
extraordinary and exaggerated possibilities in place of events. 

Furthermore,  every  government  has  opponents.  It  is  no  crime  to  oppose  a 
government purely intellectually. The government looks to the hand, not to the heart. 
Especially someone who has performed great services for this country and nation and 
caused no harm, and latterly played no part in the life of society, but has been made to 
live  in  absolute  isolation,  and  whose  works  have  been  appreciated  and  applauded  in 
the most  

 

410

important  centres  of  the  Islamic  world.21  I  fear  that  those  who  level  these  quite 
extraordinary, groundless accusations at such persons are unknowingly being exploited 
on account of anarchy, indeed, communism. 

I  have  understood  from  certain  signs  that  with  the  idea  of  belittling  the  Risale-i 
Nur  and  due  to  groundless  suspicions  about  the  Mahdi  question,  which  has  political 
associations, our covert enemies are investigating completely baseless suggestions that 
the  Risale-i  Nur  is  being  exploited  for  this.  Perhaps  it  is  because  of  these  suspicions 
that I am made to suffer such torments. I say to those tyrannical secret enemies and to 
those who listen to them out of hostility to us: God forbid! Again, God forbid! Both 
my  seventy-five-year  life,  and  especially  these  last  thirty  years,  and  the  one  hundred 
and thirty parts of the Risale-i Nur, and the thousands of people who have offered me 
their  sincere  friendship  testify  that  at  no  time  have  I  overstepped  my  mark  in  such  a 
way  and  made  the  truths  of  belief  a  means  of  winning  rank,  fame,  and  renown  for 
myself. 

Yes,  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  know  and  I  have  pointed  out  proofs  of  it  in  the 
courts  that,  not to gain for myself any position or fame, and win spiritual rank and a 
high rank in the hereafter, but in order to serve the believers with all my conviction and 
strength in the question of belief, I am ready to sacrifice not only my life in this world 
and its transient ranks, but —if necessary— my life in the hereafter and its everlasting 
ranks,  which  everyone  seeks;  and  even,  in  order  to  be  a  means  of  saving  certain 
unfortunates from Hell, —if necessary— to forgo Paradise and myself go to Hell. Just 
as  my  true  brothers  know  this,  so  I  have  proved  it  in  some  respects  in  the  courts. 
Accusing me in this way of insincerity in my service of the Risale-i Nur and belief, and 
depreciating  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  devaluing  it,  will  deprive  this  nation  of  its  sublime 
truths. 

If,  because  they  imagine  this  world  is  eternal  and  that  like  themselves  everyone 

exploits religion and belief for the world, these wretches ascribe  

                                             

21 In the eightieth of the hundred errors about these works in the indictment, the prosecution 

says: “The interpretations in the Fifth Ray are incorrect.” 

The Answer: In the Fifth Ray, it is said: “God knows best, one interpretation is this.” What this 

means is: “It is possible that one meaning of the Hadith is this.” Logically, this cannot be proved 
wrong. It can be proved wrong only by proving its impossibility. 

Secondly: Although for the past twenty years, indeed forty years, those who opposed me, and 
then those who tried to oppose the Risale-i Nur, have not refuted my interpretations on grounds of 
either logic or scholarship, and thousands of learned people —the religious scholars who oppose me 
together with the Risale-i Nur students— have confirmed them, and have not said “he’s been smitten 
by the evil-eye,” I refer it to your fair-mindedness to judge just how unjust it is for those who do not 
know how may Suras there are in the Qur’an to meet them incredulously. 

In Short: The meaning of interpretation is one probable or possible meaning of a Hadith or 

Qur’anic verse out of many. 

 

411

worldly  motives  to  someone  who  challenges  all  the  people  of  misguidance  in  this 
world,  is  ready  to  sacrifice  his  lives  both  in  this  world,  and  if  necessary,  in  the  next; 
and as he claimed in the courts would not exchange a single truth of belief for rule of 
the  whole world;  and  out  of  sincerity  and  its  mystery flees with all his  strength from 
politics  and  all  ranks,  material  and  spiritual,  which  hint  of  politics;  and  has  endured 
unequalled  torments  for  twenty  years;  and  due  to  his  way,  has  not  condescended  to 
any involvement in politics; and with respect to himself considers himself far inferior to 
his students, and believes himself to be truly wretched and unimportant — if because 
of the extraordinary strength of belief they have obtained from the Risale-i Nur, some 
of his sincere brothers ascribe to him in their private letters some of the virtues of the 
Risale-i Nur, because he  is their ‘interpreter’; and in consequence of a custom which 
has  absolutely  no  political  overtones  they  afford  him  a  high  rank  —like  people  call 
ordinary persons they love “My lord! My benefactor!,”— and they think much better 
of him than is his due; and follow the old, acceptable custom practised between master 
and students, which is not objected to and has the meaning of thanks, and praise him 
excessively; and write exaggerated eulogies, which has long been the custom to write 
at  the  ends  of  acceptable  books;  if  they  do  these  things,  can  it  in  any  way  be 
considered  a  crime?  For  sure  it  is  opposed  to  the  truth  in  a  way  since  it  is 
exaggeration,  but  he  is  a  stranger,  alone,  with  numerous  enemies,  and  there  are 
numerous  things  to  make  him  lose  his helpers. So purely in order to strengthen their 
morale  in  the  face  of  so  many  opponents  and  to  prevent  them  fleeing  and  not  to 
destroy the enthusiasm of those who praised him excessively, he changed part of what 
they had written so that it referred to the Risale-i Nur and did not reject it outright. It 
may be understood therefore just how far from the truth, the law, and fair-mindedness 
certain officials have fallen when they try to make the above person’s service of belief 
look to this world, despite his age and his being at the door of the grave. My last word 
is: 

And for every calamity: we belong to God, and to Him is our return.22 

                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i  

                                             

22 Qur’an, 2:156. 

 

412

Supplement 

I  saw  that  it  was  written  on  the  back  of  the  last  report  concerning  the 
investigations  of  the  examining  magistrate:  “On  the  pretext  that  its  explanations  of 
three  verses  against  civilization  were  not  in  conformity  with  the  present  Civil  Code, 
four  months  ago  the  decision  was  taken  by  the  Cabinet  to  officially  prohibit  the 
distribution of The Miraculousness of the Qur’an, that is, the Twenty-Fifth Word.” 

My reply to this: The Miraculousness of the Qur’an is now part of Zülfikâr, and 
on only two pages of the four hundred pages of Zülfikâr are explanations of the three 
verses,  which  reply  in  a  way  that  cannot  be  objected  to,  to  some  of  civilization’s 
criticisms  of  the  Qur’an,  and  were  included  in  three  of  my  old  treatises.  One  of  the 
verses is about the veiling of women; the second, And to the mother, a sixth,23 is about 
inheritance; as is the third, And for the man a portion equal to that of two women.24 I 
expounded  the  wisdom  of  these  verses’  meanings  in  a  way  that  would  silence  the 
philosophers, in two pages twenty years ago, and in my other treatises thirty years ago. 
It is therefore our legal right, instead of banning the four-hundred-page Zülfikâr on the 
suspicion  that  it  was  written  now,  to  excise  those  two  pages  from  it  and  return  the 
book  to  us — just as if a letter contains one or two harmful words, those words  are 
cut out and the publication of the rest is permitted. We seek our rights from your just 
court in this matter. 

Since  nobody  could  find  the  opportunity  to  come  to  read  to  me  the  forty-page 
indictment, which was given me a month ago, they read it to me today, 11th June, for 
the first time. I listened to it, and I saw that the list of my objections which I wrote for 
you  two  months  ago,  and  the  Appendix and Addendum to my objections of nearly a 
month ago, had been given to both six departments of government in Ankara, and to 
your office. Those objections refute and demolish that indictment. I see absolutely no 
necessity  to  rewrite  the  objections  to  it.  I  only  say  now,  in  order  to  recall  to  the 
prosecution, the following two or three points: 

The reason I did not take the indictment into consideration and reply to it was to 
avoid  insulting  the  honour  of  the three just courts that had acquitted us and being in 
contempt  of  them.  For  those  courts  acquitted us after studying in the minutest detail 
all  the  points  in  the  present  indictment. To completely disregard their acquittals is to 
insult the honour of the judiciary. 

                                             

23 Qur’an, 4:11. 
24 Qur’an, 4:176. 

 

413

Second  Point:  Due  to  its  gross  misrepresentations,  attaching  unimaginable 
meanings  to  one  or  two  matters  out  of  thousands,  the  prosecution  accuses  us  of 
certain  offences.  However,  those  matters  are  in  the  large  collections  of  the  Risale-i 
Nur.  The  ‘ulama  of  al-Azhar  University  in  Cairo,  the  leading  scholars  of  Damascus, 
the exacting scholars of Mecca and Medina, and of Aleppo and so on, and especially 
the  investigative  scholars  of  the  Directorate  of  Religious  Affairs,  have  all  seen  them 
and have praised them appreciatively and put their signatures to them. So it was with 
astonishment  and  bewilderment  that  I  saw  the  pseudo-scholarly  objections  in  the 
indictment. Even if I had made some errors and the indictment was correct in what it 
imputed,  although  thousands  of  scholars  had  not  spotted  them  or  objected  to  them, 
they still would not constitute a crime; they would only be scholarly errors. Moreover, 
three courts have acquitted the entire Risale-i Nur and ourselves. Only Eskişehir Court 
gave light sentences to myself and fifteen out of a hundred of my companions because 
of  fifteen  words  in  the  Twenty-Fourth  Flash,  which  is  about  the  veiling  of  women. I 
wrote in the addendum to my objections that if there is justice on the face of the earth, 
it would not accept my being convicted for expounding that verse and complying with 
what  was  laid  down  in  three  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  Qur’anic  commentaries.  As 
though collecting water from a thousand streams and in its cleverness, the prosecution 
tried  to  use  against  us  a  number  of  points  in  books  and  letters  written  over  twenty 
years. That makes the, not three, but five or six courts which acquitted us on this point 
our accomplices in this imaginary crime. I am reminding the prosecution not to insult 
the honour of those just courts. 

The  Third:  Even  if  explicitly, to criticize and object to a leader who is dead and 
gone,  whose  relations  with  the  Government  have  ceased,  and  who  was  the  cause  of 
certain  faults  in  the  reforms,  cannot  be  a  legal  offence.  But  there  was  not  anything 
explicit; 
its 
misrepresentations. It publicized those confidential meanings, which we do not tell to 
everyone,  and  drew  everyone’s  attention  to  them.  If  there  is  any  crime  involved, the 
prosecution is guilty. Because it is inciting the people, and attracting their attention to 
those meanings. 

the  prosecution  applied  my  general  statements 

through 

to  him 

The  Fourth:  Due  to  baseless  suspicions,  repeating  the same old story, collecting 
water from a thousand streams, the prosecution investigated hints of a secret society, 
despite our unequivocal acquittal on this point by three courts. However, while there 
are  numerous  political societies which are harmful for this nation and country, which 
they permit and look on tolerantly, to call a secret society the solidarity of the Risale-i 
Nur  

 

414

students with their fellow-students, which as established by the testimony of thousands 
of witnesses and signs and the fact that six provinces did not interfere with us, is solely 
for the good of the country, nation, and religion, on account of happiness in this world 
and  the  next,  and  to  strive  against  the  currents  from  inside  and  outside  the  country 
which  are  bent on corruption, and like  the prosecution to accuse them of “exploiting 
religion and inciting the people to disturb public order and breach security,” although 
in twenty years not one single such incident has been recorded in connection with the 
Risale-i  Nur  students,  will  bring  not  mankind,  but  the  earth  to  anger,  thus  rejecting 
such  an  accusation.  However...  there  is  no  need  to say  anything  further.  My  written 
objections  and  its  addendum,  which  were  written  long  before  the  indictment,  are  my 
reply to it. 

                                                                         Prisoner  S a i d  N u r s i , 
                                                                                     Afyon Prison 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

I say this to Afyon Court and the Chief Criminal Judge: 
Because  since  my early youth I could not endure to be dominated, I severed my 
relations  with  the  world.  Now  life  has  become  a  great  burden  for  me  with  this 
meaningless,  unnecessary  oppression.  I  do  not  have  the  power  to  endure  the 
persecution of thousands of officials outside. I am fed up with this sort of life. With all 
my  strength  I  am  requesting  of  you  that  you  sentence  me.  To  enter  the  grave is  not 
within  my  power,  and  I  have  to  remain  in  prison.  You  too  know  that  the 
unsubstantiated  crimes  the  prosecution  accuses  me  of  are  non-existent.  I  cannot  be 
convicted because of them. However,  I have serious  faults before my true duties, for 
which  I  can  in  effect  be  convicted.  If  it  is  appropriate  to  ask,  I  shall  reply  to  your 
question. Yes, my only crime out of my serious faults is this: it occurred to me here in 
Afyon  Prison  that  in  the  view  of  reality  it  was  an  unforgiveable  fault  that,  because  I 
had not looked to the world, I had not performed the weighty duty with which I had 
been charged in the name of the country, nation, and religion, and my not knowing this 
did not excuse me. 

The  fact  that  three  courts  have  acquitted  us  in  this  respect  shows  just  how  far 
from  truth  and  justice  those  have  fallen  who  give  the  name  of  a  worldly,  political 
society to the Risale-i Nur students’ disinterested  

 

415

attachment to the Risale-i Nur and its interpreter, which looks purely to the hereafter, 
and try to show that they are guilty of a criminal offence. We too say: 

The basis and foundation of human society and particularly the Islamic nation are 
the sincere bonds between relatives, and the concerned attachment between tribes and 
groups, and due to Islamic nationhood the spiritual brotherhood and mutual assistance 
between  believers,  and  the  devotion  to  one’s  nation,  and  unshakeable  attachment  to 
and partiality for the truths of the Qur’an and those who propagate them. It is only by 
denying these bonds, which ensure the life of society, and by accepting the ‘red peril’ 
—which scatters the terrible seed of anarchy from the North, which ruins the younger 
generation and nationhood, and drawing to itself everyone’s children, destroys kinship 
and  nationhood,  and  opens  up  the  way  to  the  complete  corruption  of  human 
civilization  and  the  life  of  society—  that  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  can  be  called  a 
political  society,  which  is  an  indictable  offence.  For  this  reason,  true  students  of  the 
Risale-i  Nur proclaim openly their sacred attachment to the truths of the Qur’an and 
their unshakeable bonds of brotherhood which look to the hereafter. Because they are 
happy to accept any penalty they may receive because of that brotherhood, they admit 
in your just court the truth as it is. They do not stoop to defend themselves with lies, 
sycophancy, and cunning. 

                                                                                           Prisoner   
                                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i  

 

416

An Addendum to the Addition to My Written Objections 
to the Indictment Presented to Afyon Court 

Firstly:  I  tell  the  court  that  since  the  new  indictment  is  based  on  the  old 
indictments of Denizli and Eskişehir Courts, and on the superficial investigations of the 
superficial ‘committees of experts,’ who were opposed to us, I claim in your court that 
if  I  cannot  prove  one  hundred  errors  in  this  indictment,  I  shall  be  happy  with  a 
hundred-year  sentence.  Now  I  have  proved  my  case;  if  you  wish  I  can  present  you 
with the table of more than a hundred errors. 

Secondly:  When  during  the Denizli trial, our books and papers had been sent to 
Ankara and I was full of anxiety and despair that the judgement would be given against 
us, I wrote to my friends the following piece, which has been added to the end of some 
of my defence speeches: “If the officers of the law who are studying the Risale-i Nur 
with the idea of criticizing it strengthen or save their belief through it, bear witness that 
I forgive them. For we are here to serve. The Risale-i Nur’s function is to strengthen 
and  save  belief.  We  are  charged  with  serving  belief  without  differentiating  between 
friend and foe, and without taking sides.” 

Judges of the Court! In consequence of this truth, the powerful, irrefutable proofs 
of the Risale-i Nur have directed the hearts of the people of the court towards itself; 
whatever you do against me, I forgive you; I will harbour no grudge. It is because of 
this  that  although  I  have  been  riled  by  the  extreme  tyranny  and  repression  I  have 
suffered,  and  the  contemptuous  treatment  and defamation  of  my  person,  which  have 
been to an extent I have never previously experienced, I have endured it and have not 
even spoken ill of those involved. The collections of the Risale-i Nur, which you have 
in your possession, form my irrefutable, incontestable defence and my objections to all 
the charges made against us and the crimes of which we are accused. 

It  is  astonishing  that  although  the  leading  scholars  of  Cairo,  Damascus,  Aleppo, 
Medina  and  Mecca,  and  the  exacting  scholars  of the Directorate of Religious Affairs 
have  studied  the  Risale-i  Nur  collections  minutely,  and  offering  no  criticisms  have 
praised and applauded them, the ‘clever’ persons who compiled the indictment against 
us  showed  through  an  extraordinary  and  obvious  error  —stating  that  the  Qur’an 
contains  forty  Suras—  just  how  superficially  they  considered  the  matter.  Despite 
hundreds of thousands of the people of reality affirming the Risale-i Nur, under these 
severe conditions, and myself in exile, alone  

 

417

and wretched and the object of fearsome attacks, that prosecutor, who does not even 
know  how  many  Suras  there  are  in  the  Qur’an,  said:  “Although  the  Risale-i  Nur 
attempts to expound the Qur’an and interpret Hadiths, it has no scholarly substance or 
value in teaching its readers in a part of it...” It is understood just how far his criticisms 
are from the law, reality, justice and equity. 

 I also make this complaint to you, that although for two hours you made us listen 
to the entire forty-page indictment, which contains hundreds of errors and wounds our 
hearts, despite my insistence you did not allow me two minutes to read one and a half 
pages  in  reply,  which  were  the  complete  truth.  In  the  name  of  justice  I  therefore 
request that you permit me to read my entire list of objections. 

Thirdly:  Every  government  has  opponents.  But  so  long  as  they  do  not  disturb 
public order, they may not be touched legally. Is it at all possible then that myself and 
those like me who are disenchanted with the world and work only for the grave should 
give up spending the remainder of their lives within the bounds taught by the Qur’an, 
on the way our forefathers followed for one thousand three hundred and fifty years, in 
a  way  permitted  by the rules sanctified at all times by three hundred and fifty million 
believers, — that we should give up that way, and being coerced by our enemies and 
their  subterfuges,  merely  for  this  brief  and  fleeting  worldly  life,  support  the  savage 
laws  and  principles  of  an  immoral,  dissolute  civilization,  indeed,  of  a  sort  of 
communism, and adopt them as our way? No law anywhere, and no one the tiniest bit 
fair,  would  force  us  to  accept  them.  We  only  say  to  those  who  oppose  us:  Don’t 
bother us and we won’t bother you! 

It is due to this fact that I support neither intellectually nor on scholarly grounds 
the  arbitrary  commands  of  a  commander,  called  laws,  which  have  made  Aya  Sophia 
into a house of idols and the Shaykh al-Islam’s Office into a girls’ high school. And for 
myself  I  do  not  act  in  accordance  with  them.  But  although  for  twenty  years  I  have 
been severely  oppressed during my tortuous captivity, I have not become involved in 
politics,  nor  provoked  the  authorities,  nor  disturbed  public  order.  Although  I  have 
hundreds of thousands of Risale-i Nur friends, not a single incident has been recorded 
involving  the  disturbance  of  the  peace.  I  am  fed  up  with  life  due  to  the  utterly 
humiliating  and  unjust  treatment  directed  at  my  person  here  in  my  exile  in  the  last 
period of my life, such as I have never before suffered and which has galled me. I feel 
disgust  at  freedom  even,  under  this  oppression.  I  have  written  you  a  petition  saying 
that  contrary to everyone else, I want not my acquittal but to be convicted and given 
not a light sentence, I want the heaviest penalty. For in order to be saved from  

 

418

this unparalleled, extraordinarily tyrannical treatment, there is no solution for me other 
than  entering  either  the  grave  or  prison.  But  since  suicide  is  not  permitted,  and  the 
appointed  hour  of  death  is  unknown  and  outside  my  power,  I  am  resigned  to  the 
imprisonment  I  now  suffer  in  absolute  solitary  confinement.25  However,  I  am  not 
presenting this petition for the present, for the sake of my innocent companions. 

Fourthly:  Confirmed  by  all  that  I  have  written  in  the  Risale-i  Nur  these  thirty 
years  of  my  life,  the  period  I  have  called  that  of  the  New  Said,  and  the  facts 
concerning my person, and testified to by the fair-minded people and friends who have 
met with me with serious intention, I state this: As far as I have been able I have tried 
to  restrain  my  evil-commanding  soul  from  indulging  in  self-advertisement,  fame-
seeking,  and  pride,  and  perhaps  a  hundred  times I  have  wounded  the  feelings  of the 
Risale-i Nur students who have excessively good opinions of me. As is confirmed by 
both my close friends and my brothers, and the signs they have observed, I told them: 
“I possess nothing, I am the wretched herald of the jeweller’s shop of the Qur’an.” It 
is  not  winning  worldly  rank  for myself and high position and fame, even supposing I 
was  given  high  spiritual  rank,  being  frightened  of  the  possibility  of  my  soul  taking  a 
share in the service I perform and spoiling my sincerity and pure intention, I decided to 
sacrifice those ranks and positions for my service. Yet despite my acting in this way, 
and  my  not  accepting  the  gratitude  of  some  of  my  brothers  for  their benefiting  from 
the Risale-i Nur —which has been presented in your high court as though it was some 
political  matter  of  great  moment—  you  have  made  their  respect  for  me,  which  is 
greater than that of a son for his father, the subject of interrogation. You have driven 
some of them to deny it. You have made us listen in astonishment. Can it be imagined 
a crime for some unfortunate to be praised although he himself is not happy at this and 
does not consider himself worthy? 

Fifthly:  I tell you certainly that to accuse the Risale-i Nur students of belonging 
to  a  political  society  and  of  political  involvement  when  they  have  absolutely  no 
connection  with  any  society,  association,  or  political  movement,  is  knowingly  or 
unknowingly to struggle against us on account of a secret atheistic organization which 
for forty years has been working directly against Islam and belief, or in the name of a 
sort  of  communism  which  produces  anarchy  in  this  country.  For  three  courts  of  law 
have  acquitted  in  that  respect  all  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  and  the  treatises  of  the 
Risale-i  Nur.  Only,  Eskişehir  Court  gave  me  one  year,  and  out  of  one  hundred  and 
twenty others, fifteen of my friends six months each  

                                             

25 The same situation has now continued for seventeen months. 

 

419

because  of  a  single  matter  in a short treatise about the veiling of women, or perhaps 
because of the sentence: “According to what I have heard, in the centre of government 
a  shoe-shiner  behaved  impudently  towards  the  semi-naked  wife  of  an  important 
person,  and  his  astonishing  unmannerliness  dealt  a  slap  in  the  shameless  face  of 
someone opposed to the veiling of women,” which was written long ago. That means, 
to accuse the Risale-i Nur and its students now is to charge and convict three courts, 
and to be contemptuous of them. 

Sixthly: The Risale-i Nur cannot be combated. All the Islamic scholars who have 
seen  it  have  confirmed  that  it  is  a  veracious  commentary  on  the  Qur’an,  that  is,  it 
consists of powerful proofs of its truths. It is a miracle of the Qur’an this century, and 
a  firm  barrier  for  this  nation  and  country  against  the  perils  from  the  North.  I  have 
understood  therefore  that  it  is  a  duty  of  your  court  not  to  scare  off  its  students,  but 
with regard to general rights, to encourage them, and I await this from you. Thanks to 
freedom  of  scholarship,  the  books  and  journals  of  those  with  no  religion  and  some 
political atheists, who are harmful for the nation, country, and public security, are not 
interfered with, so it surely is not a crime to be a student of the Risale-i Nur and save 
the belief of the innocent, needy youth and preserve them from immorality; indeed, the 
Government and Ministry of Education should applaud and encourage it. 

My last word: May Almighty God allow the judges to execute the law with true 

justice. Amen. 

For  us  God  suffices and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs.26 * The best of 
lords and the Best of Helpers.27 

All praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds. 

                                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i  

                                             

26 Qur’an, 3:173. 
27 Qur’an, 8:40. 

 

420

My Last Word 

I say this to the Judges of the Court: 
I  have  understood  from  both  the  indictment  and  from  my  long  solitary 
confinement that in this matter it is mostly my person that is under consideration, and 
it has been seen fit to destroy my character. As though my person was harmful to the 
government,  public  security,  and  the  country,  and  making  religion  a  screen,  I 
harboured worldly aims, and was pursuing some sort of politics. In the face of this, I 
tell you the following with complete certitude: 

Because of these unfounded suspicions, do not injure the Risale-i Nur students by 
means  of  slandering  my  person,  for  they  are  devoted  to  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  to  this 
country and nation, and are of great value for them. For if you do, it could open up the 
way  to  much  immaterial  harm  for  this  country  and  nation,  indeed,  to  their  being 
exposed to danger. I tell you this certainly too: whatever is visited on my person in the 
way of insult, humiliating treatment, slander, torture, and prison sentences, on account 
of the way I now follow I have decided to accept it — on condition no harm comes to 
the Risale-i Nur and its students because of me. There is also reward in this for me in 
the hereafter. While weeping, I am also pleased since in this way I may be saved from 
the sins of my evil-commanding soul. If these wretched innocent people had not been 
sent to prison along with me, I would have spoken out with great vehemence in your 
court. You have seen too that the person who wrote the indictment wants to destroy 
my character with his misrepresentations and exaggerations, and partly misinterpreting 
what is written, by showing that all my books and letters, confidential and otherwise, 
written  over  these  twenty  to  thirty  years  of  my  life  were  written  this  year,  and  had 
never  been  seen  by  any  court,  or  been  pardoned,  or  been  subject  to  the  passage  of 
time. I have said a hundred times that my person is faulty, and the reason that although 
they have defamed me on every occasion it has had no effect on public regard for me, 
which is enough to perturb the politicians, is this: there is an intense and overwhelming 
need here  at  this time for  a number of people to teach religion  and  strengthen belief, 
people who will sacrifice the truth for nothing, make it a tool of nothing, and take no 
share for their own souls. Only in this way may what they teach about faith be profited 
from and come to be believed in with complete certainty. 

Yes,  it  seems  that  at  no  time  or place was the need so great, for the danger has 
come in full force from outside. Although I have admitted and proclaimed that I myself 
have not met this need, they have supposed that I have met the need to an extent not 
because of any virtue of mine, but  

 

421

because  of  the  severity  of  the  need  and  others  not  being  in  the  forefront.  For a long 
time  I  have  looked  on  in  astonishment  and  wonder,  but  only  now  understood  the 
wisdom in this public regard, of which I am in no way worthy — despite my fearsome 
faults. The wisdom in it is this: 

Here  at  this  time,  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  the  collective  personality  of  its  students 
have directed that severe need to themselves. They have supposed my person to be a 
representative  of  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  wondrous  reality  and  its  sincere  and  pure 
personality —despite my share of its work and service being only a thousandth— and 
they have given me the attention.  But this is both harmful for me, and a burden. It is 
also not my right. But I have remained silent and have accepted the harm for the sake 
of  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  its  collective  personality.  Also,  because  of  my  service  to  it, 
they  have  considered  my  unimportant  person  to  be  included  in  the  predictions  about 
the Risale-i Nur, which is a mirror reflecting the All-Wise Qur’an’s miraculousness at 
this  time,  and  the  collective  personality  of  its  sincere  students,  made  through  Divine 
inspiration  by  some  of  the  saints  such  as  Imam  ‘Ali  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him) 
and Gawth al-A‘zam (May his mystery be sanctified). It seems I was mistaken, for in 
some places I attributed some of their kind attention to my person, and did not direct it 
towards the Risale-i Nur. The reason for this was my weakness; I apparently accepted 
part  of  it  for  myself  to  prevent  the  things  that  might  scare  away  those  who  help  me 
multiplying  and  to  increase  their  confidence  in  what  I  said.  I  warn  you!  There  is  no 
need  to  defame  my  transitory  person,  which  is  at  the  door  of  the  grave;  there  is  no 
necessity to give it so much importance. In any event you cannot combat the Risale-i 
Nur,  so  do  not  combat  it!  You  cannot  defeat  it.  You  will  cause  great  harm  to  this 
nation  and  country  by  combating  it.  Anyway  you  cannot scatter its students. For the 
defender  of  the  Qur’an  at  this time and its heroic actions —which  in  the view of  the 
Islamic  world  are  like  those  of  former  times—  will  not  allow  the  sons  of  this  land’s 
forefathers,  who  gave  forty  to  fifty  million  martyrs  on  the  way  of  defending  the 
Qur’an,  to  abandon  it.  Even  if  they  apparently  withdraw,  those  sincere  students  are 
still bound to it with all their lives and spirits. They will not abandon the Risale-i Nur, 
which  is  a  mirror  of  that  reality,  thereby  harming  this  nation,  country,  and  public 
security. 

My last word is: 

But if they turn away, say: “God suffices me, there is no god but He; in Him 
do I place my trust — He the Sustainer of the Throne [of Glory] Supreme!”28 

                                             

28 Qur’an, 9:129. 

 

422

A Petition Sent to the Cabinet 

I have a request of the greatest importance to present to the Cabinet. 
I request the Cabinet that the fifteen-page Fifth Ray, which was originally written 
years  ago,  and  was  later  included  at  the  end  of  the  more  than  three-hundred-page 
collection  called  The  Illuminating  Lamp  (Siracü’n-Nur),  and  was  the  reason  for  the 
collection being collected up by the Cabinet, be removed from The Illuminating Lamp. 
For  it  has  been  established  that  the  work  is  in  many  ways  useful  for  the  disaster-
stricken,  the  elderly,  and  those  who  have  fallen  into  doubt  concerning  their  faith.  I 
request  that  the  piece  which  is  imagined  to  be  harmful  is  banned,  but  permission  is 
given  for  the  remaining  three  hundred  pages  to  be  published,  so  that  the  calamity-
stricken  and  the  elderly  can  receive  solace  from  it  and  the needy  can  profit from the 
truths of belief that it contains. 

Moreover, in the four-hundred-page Zülfikâr, two pages written thirty years ago 
expounding  two  verses  about  inheritance  and  the  veiling  of  women  in  reply  to  the 
philosophers of Europe, and one line about banks in Signs of Miraculousness (Isharat 
al-I‘jaz ), published thirty years ago, about the verse But God has permitted trade and 
forbidden usury,29 and approximately a line written thirty years ago while I was in the 
Darü’l-Hikmet, among the six  questions asked of the Shaykh al-Islam’s Office by the 
head cleric of the Anglican Church — I request that these passages are excised and the 
Zülfikâr collection, which has been confiscated on the pretext of those two pages and 
one  line  —because  they  are  not  in  conformity  with  the  present  Civil  Code—  is 
returned. For it has been highly praised by the Islamic world and its benefits have been 
seen  in  fact,  and  it  proves  wonderfully  three  of  the  pillars  of  belief.  This  is  what  we 
request and it is our right. Just as if five words of a letter are censored, the remainder 
are  permitted,  so  we  are  seeking  this  important  legal  right  of  ours.  We  demand  that 
together  with  the  Qur’an  and  the  lovers  of  faith  who  through  the  Risale-i Nur serve 
the nation, country and public security, we are delivered from the oppression of those 
who make mountains out of molehills  concerning us. Also, I have not seen a copy of 
The  Six  Attacks  for  eighteen  years,  which  I  wrote  when  full  of  anger  at  the  severe 
repression  I  was  suffering  at  that  time;  saying  it  was  confidential  I  did  not  give 
permission  for  it  to  be  published.  Anyway  it  came  into  the  hands  of  three  or  four 
courts, and they returned it to its owners. 

                                                                                       S a i d  N u r s i  

                                             

29 Qur’an, 2:275. 

 

423

In His Name, be He glorified! 

 [This  is  written  to  thank  the  experts’  committee  of  the  Directorate  of 
Religious Affairs. I shall explain three ‘Points’ in order to assist in amending 
their minor criticisms, the answer of which is clear.] 

The First: I thank those scholars in three ways. For myself I am grateful to them.  
Firstly:  Apart  from  the  Fifth  Ray,  their  summarizing  appreciatively  the  other 

thirteen parts of The Illuminating Lamp Collection. 

Secondly: Their refuting the allegations made against us of founding a sufi order, 

setting up a political society, and breaching security. 

Thirdly: Their corroborating my case in court. That is, I told the court: If there is 
any fault, it is mine. The Risale-i Nur students are sincere and innocent, and work at 
the  Risale-i  Nur  for  their  faith.  Thus, their  committee  of  experts  also  exonerates  the 
Risale-i  Nur  students, and ascribes all the fault to me. So I say to its members: May 
God be pleased with you! Only, they made partners in my crime the late Hasan Feyzi 
and the late Hafiz Ali, and two or three others who are the heirs of those two blessed 
martyrs  and  work  according  to  their  system.  But  they  were  wrong  in  one  way.  For 
they were ahead of me not in faults but in the service of belief, and were given to me 
by  Divine  grace  as  assistants,  out  of  mercy  for  my  weakness,  and  were  free  of  my 
faults. 

Second  Point:  The  committee  of  experts  said that some of the narrations in the 
Fifth Ray are ‘dubious’ and others are ‘false,’ and that some were misinterpreted. This 
was written  in the same way as the indictment in Afyon, which was against us. But I 
proved  in  a  table  fifteen  pages  long  that  it  contained  eighty-one  mistakes.  The 
respected  committee  of  experts  should  see  the  table.  An  example  of  one  of  the 
mistakes is as follows: 

The  prosecutor  said:  “All  the  interpretations  are  wrong,  and  the  narrations  are 

either false (mawdu’) or dubious.” 

And  I  say:  To  interpret  a  Hadith  means  saying  that  such-and-such  a  meaning  is 
possibly or probably intended by the Hadith. According to logic, it is possible to refute 
the  possibility  of  that  meaning  only  by  proving  its  impossibility.  But  just  as  the 
meaning  has  been  seen  this  century  and  has  been  realized,  so  one  aspect  of  the 
universality of the Hadith’s  

 

424

allusive level of meaning has observedly shown one flash of its miraculous predictions 
to be true at this time, and can therefore in no way be denied or objected to. It has also 
been proved in the table that the prosecutor’s saying that “all the narrations are either 
false or dubious” is wrong in three respects. 

The First: It is wrong in ten respects to deny such narrations in their entirety, for 
Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, who memorized a million Hadiths, and Imam Bukhari, who 
memorized five hundred thousand, did not have the courage to deny them, and anyway 
such a denial is not possible; and the prosecutor has not seen all the books of Hadiths; 
and  most  of  the  Umma  every  century  have  awaited  the  appearance  of  what  those 
narrations  signify  or  to  witness  one  aspect  of  their  general  meanings;  and  they  have 
just about been accepted by the Umma; and a number of aspects and samples of them 
which are completely true have appeared and been seen. 

The  Second  Respect:  The  meaning of mawdu’  is that a narration is  not a Hadith 
with an authenticated chain of authorities. It does not mean that its meaning is wrong. 
Since  among  the  Umma,  especially  the  people  of  reality  and  those  who  have  had 
uncovered to them the realities, and some of the Hadith scholars and those qualified to 
interpret  the  law,  have  accepted  them  and  awaited  the  appearance  of  what  they 
indicate, surely those narrations contain truths which look to everyone, like proverbs. 

The Third Respect: What question or narration is there that in one of their books 
the  scholars,  whose  ways  and  schools  are  all  different,  have  not  objected  to  it?  For 
example,  one  of  the  narrations  about  the  appearance  of  several  Dajjals  (Antichrists) 
within Islam is the following Hadith, which foretells explicitly the dissension of Hulagu 
and Jenghiz: “The ‘Abbasid Caliphate will long continue, until it falls into the hands of 
the Dajjal.”30 Like this Hadith, which states that after five hundred years a Dajjal will 
appear  in  Islam,  numerous  narrations  give news of the figures that will appear at the 
end  of  time.  Nevertheless,  some  of  the  mujtahids  who  were  of  different  schools,  or 
whose 
they  were  either 
unauthenticated  or  dubious.  Anyway...  the  reason  I  have  cut  this  long  story  short  is 
related  to  the Risale-i  Nur, for just as four severe earthquakes ‘coincided’31 with  the 
Risale-i  Nur  being  attacked,  demonstrating  the  earth’s  wrath,  so  during  the  hours  I 
was writing this reply, two severe earthquakes occurred here. It was like this: 
It was two earthquakes ‘coinciding’ with the suffering I was experi 

ideas  were  extreme,  did  not  accept 

them,  saying 

                                             

30 See, al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, xiv, 271, No: 33,436; Musnad al-Firdaws, iii, 447; 

Majma’u’l-Zawa’id, v, 186; Jam’u’l-Fawa’id, i, 849. 
31 ‘Tevâfuk’: See page 407, fn. 20 above. 

 

425

encing from the wounds caused by the surgical operation of the experts’ report, which 
had  been  given  me  that evening, and from my pitiful difficulties at having no contact 
with  others  and  having  to  write  myself  with  my  wretched  pen.  Yes,  I  received  that 
evening  the  report  from  the  Directorate  of  Religious  Affairs,  on  which  I  had  placed 
most  trust  during  my  eight  months  of  distress  in  solitary  confinement,  and  had 
expected would come to our assistance. This morning I understood that with the most 
trivial matters they had helped not me but the public prosecutor. I saw that they said: 
“Said said that the last four earthquakes were instances of the Risale-i Nur’s wonder-
working.” Then, when intending to write, as I had written in the table of errors: “Like 
acceptable  alms-giving,  the  Risale-i  Nur  is  a  means  of  calamities  being  repulsed. 
Whenever it is attacked, calamities seize the opportunity and occur. Sometimes too the 
earth rages,” two severe earthquakes32 occurred here, which made me give up writing 
the piece, so I am leaving it and passing on to the third Point. 

Third  Point:  Exacting,  veracious,  and  fair-minded  scholars  of  the  experts’ 
committee!  A  long-standing  and  acceptable  practice  among  scholars  is  their  writing 
eulogies  and praises,  sometimes  exaggerated,  sometimes  the  opposite,  at  the  ends of 
fine  works  written  by  others,  and  publishing  them,  and  the authors in question being 
grateful and pleased at the writers of such eulogies, and their rivals also not accusing 
them  of  boasting.  So  I  have  been  unable  to  equate  it  with  careful  study,  precise 
knowledge,  kind  assistance,  and  fairness,  that  you  should  have  considered  it  self-
advertisement that I did not altogether reject the eulogies written by some special and 
sincere students of the Risale-i Nur in the style of the late Hasan Feyzi and the martyr 
Hafiz Ali, which they wrote with the idea of assisting me in my helplessness, weakness, 
aloneness, and exile in the face of so many unfair people attacking and objecting to me 
savagely, and to encourage the needy to embrace the Risale-i Nur. I was sorry at this. 
Those  pure-hearted  friends  of  mine  never  thought  of  politics,  but  verified  by 
mathematical reckoning said: “One aspect and minor meaning of the Hadith’s universal 
allusive meaning at this time is  the Risale-i Nur,” which cannot be said to be wrong. 
For  time  is  proving  it  right.  In  any  event,  even  if  it  was  very  exaggerated  or  even 
wrong,  it  would  still  only  be  a  scholarly  mistake.  And  everyone  can  write  his  own 
opinions. You know how many various views and opinions are written in the works of 
the  twelve  schools  of  the  Shari‘a,  and  particularly  in  the  Hanafi,  Maliki,  Shafi‘i,  and 
Hanbali Schools, and of the nearly seventy authori 

                                             

32 These two earthquakes coincided with Friday, 18.9.1948, in the morning.  
Signed in the name of the Risale-i Nur students being held in Afyon Prison, Halil Mustafa 

Mehmed Feyzi Husrev 

 

426

ties of the sciences of theology (kalam) and the principles of religion. However, never 
at any time has the need for agreement between the scholars of religion been as great 
as it is at present, and for them to avoid dispute. Now we are compelled to leave aside 
conflict in secondary matters and not to make them the subject of dispute. 

I have three questions to ask of the equitable hojas of the committee of experts: 

The  First:  Is  a  person  guilty  of  an  offence  if  someone  praises  him  with  a  good 
intention? Especially if he does not want it — could it be thought self-love if as far as 
he can he either rejects such praise or directs it towards someone else, but in order not 
to lose his sincere friend, does not scold him, and responds with silence and saying that 
the praise is a hundred times greater than his due? 

The Second Question: At this time of terrible attacks on religion and momentous 
religious questions, should  a lover of the truth from among the Risale-i Nur students 
be deserving of such blame and insult because of a harmless, minor scholarly error and 
a  mistaken  view?  Is  it  permissible  that  while  awaiting  from masters like yourselves a 
gentle warning, the student who wrote the eulogy should be dealt a blow in this way 
with the hand of the judiciary? 

The  Third  Question:  Are  these  criticisms  of  yours,  related  to  only  one  or  two 
matters,  fitting for the Risale-i Nur,  which these twenty  years has never been shaken 
by  its  innumerable  opponents  and  has  strengthened  the  belief  of  thousands  of  needy 
people? Also I remind those exact scholars of the following: because they saw a letter 
of mine at the top of Ahmed Feyzi’s eulogy, they criticize me in their report as though 
I had written the eulogy to myself. But the letter was written in order not to accept the 
praises for myself, and to have them cut out of the eulogy, and I did cut out a part of 
them. Others I was going to modify, but being forced to hurry, I sent the letter to one 
of  my  brothers  without  completing  it.  He  then  put  the  letter  at  the  beginning  of the 
eulogy.  Then  when  it  was  being  sent  to  a  private  person,  it  was  seized  by  the 
government. Is such a private eulogy, which was purely scholarly and a personal view, 
and  was  sent  from  friend  to  friend  with  the  idea  of  consulting  about  modifying  it, 
deserving of such vehement objections? Moreover, the two small collections bound in 
red and black consisted of a number of confidential letters written privately to friends 
in order to congratulate, encourage, and  

 

427

gratify  them.  Anyway,  one  or  two  people  had  been  interested  in  them,  and  had 
gathered them together in a book so they should not get lost. In the searches it fell into 
the  hands  of  the  police.  Is  there  any  need  to  put  forward  absurd  suppositions  about 
such letters, make them the subject of interrogation, and try to relate them to politics? 
Is  it  not  like  being  blind  to  the  terrible  dragons  assaulting  the  Qur’an,  and  not  even 
looking at them, and trying to combat pestilential mosquitoes? 

Does  it  not  infer  by  ignoring  Saraçoglu,  who  calls  religion  and  the  training  of 
Muhammad  “poison”,  and  by  disputing  The  Illuminating  Lamp,  which  demonstrates 
the  Qur’anic  reality  as  clearly  as  the  sun  and  proves  it  to  be  the  perfect  cure  for 
mankind’s  wounds,  assisting  in  the  confiscation  of  that  collection?  We  await  from 
persons like yourselves balm for our wounds, and your insight and assistance, and we 
are not offended at your minor criticisms. 

                                                                                              Prisoner,   
                                                                                       S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

 [This forms the introduction to the pieces that follow it.] 

With the idea of helping a little to refute with true, fair evidences Afyon Court’s 
decision against us and turn the Appeal Court in our favour, and in order to indicate 
briefly  some  of  the  errors  in  the  indictment,  we  have  written  exactly the pieces from 
the  confidential  treatises  which  they  mentioned  as  being  offences;  pointing  out  the 
errors, we show those who are convicting us to be guilty of an offence. 

For instance: In order to have me sentenced to the heaviest penalty, they wrote at 
the end of the indictment as an index of all my crimes: “The matters Said Nursi rejects: 
One: the abolition of the Empire and Caliphate.” This is both wrong and an oversight. 
For fifteen years ago in Eskişehir Court I replied to a question about my writing in the 
Twenty-Sixth Flash, the Treatise For the Elderly: “I was grieved at the passing of the 
sovereignty of the caliphate,” and my reply silenced the court. Anyone who considers 
to  be  a  crime  an  unimportant  memory,  faded  with  time,  which  was  covered  by  the 
pardon and has been acquitted, is himself guilty. 

 As  documentary  evidence  for  this  imaginary  crime,  they  showed  a  Hadith  from 

one of the Flashes, which is also found in The Miracles of  

 

428

Muhammad  (PBUH):  “After  me  the  caliphate  will  last  thirty  years,  then  it  will  be 
rapacious  monarchy,  then  corruption  and  tyranny.”33  That  is,  after  the  four  Rightly-
Guided  Caliphs  there  will  be  corruption.  I  wrote  in  one  of  my  old  treatises  that  this 
Hadith  contained  three  miraculous  prophecies.  Then  in  the  indictment,  it  gave  as my 
crime:  “In  one  of  his  treatises  Said  says:  ‘After  the  caliphate  will  be  tryanny  and 
corruption.’” You superficial committee! Anyone who considers it a crime to explain 
the  miraculous  prediction  of  a  Hadith  which  foretells  the  widespread  spiritual  and 
material corruption among mankind of the present and an event that will cause chaos 
on the earth, is himself guilty both spiritually and materially. 

They also wrote that “a person is guilty of political reaction if he calls innovation, 
misguidance,  and  atheism,  the  reforms,  such  as  the  closure  of  the  sufi  tekkes  and 
zaviyes  and  the  religious  schools;  the  acceptance  of  secularism;  the  establishment  of 
nationalist principles instead of Islam; the wearing of the brimmed hat; the banning of 
Islamic  dress  for  women;  the  enforced  use  of  the  Latin  alphabet  in  place  of  the 
Qur’anic  alphabet;  the  ezan  and  iqama  being  recited  in  Turkish;  the  prohibition  of 
religious  instruction  in  schools;  the  recognition  of  equal  rights  for  women  and  in 
inheritance; and the abolition of polygamy. 

Unfair  committee!  The  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  has every century been 
the sacred, heavenly guide of three hundred and fifty million people, the programme of 
all their happiness, and the sacred treasury of the life of this world and the next. If it is 
possible  to  deny  numerous  of  its  explicit  verses,  which  do  not  bear  interpretation, 
about  the  veiling  of  women,  inheritance,  polygamy,  the  recollection  of  God, 
instruction  in  religious  knowledge  and  its  dissemination,  and  the  preservation  of  the 
marks of religion, and to make guilty of crimes all the authoritative Islamic interpreters 
of  the  law  and  all  the  Shaykh  al-Islam’s,  and  if  you  can  annul  the  passage  of  time, 
quash the numerous court acquittals, and the legal pardons, and abolish confidentiality 
and the private side of things, and freedom of conscience and freedom of thought, and 
intellectual  and  scholarly  opposition,  and  remove  them  from  this  country  and  its 
governments, you can make me guilty of these things. Otherwise in the court of truth, 
reality, and justice you will be awesomely guilty! 

                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i 
  

                                             

33 .Musnad, iv, 273; v, 220, 221; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa, i, 340. 

 

429

[Although  it  is  against  them,  a  piece  the  court  astonishingly  showed  to  be 
against us.] 

I say in this court of law that if there is any justice on the face of the earth, it will 
reject  the  unjust  decision  to  convict  a  man  who,  basing  it  on  the  agreement  and 
confirmation of three hundred and fifty thousand Qur’anic commentaries and following 
the  beliefs  of  our  forefathers  for  one  thousand,  three  hundred  and  fifty  years, 
expounded  a  Divine  rule  that  has  been  considered  most  sacred  and  genuine  in  the 
social  life  of  three  hundred  and  fifty  million Muslims every century  for one thousand 
three hundred and fifty years; it should quash the judgement. 

* * * 

 [A  piece  which  the  court  wrote  with  astonishment  and  appreciation  in  its 
decision, as though it was against us, but which in fact condemns them.] 

In the Twenty-Sixth Letter, Said Nursi speaks of himself like this: “This wretched 

brother of yours has three personalities which are far from each other. 

“T h e  F i r s t :  In regard to being the herald of the elevated treasury of the All-
Wise Qur’an, I have a temporary personality which pertains solely to the Qur’an. The 
extremely exalted character demanded by the position of herald is not my character; I 
do not possess such a character.  It rather consists of the qualities necessitated by the 
position and the duty. Whatever you see in me of this sort of quality, is not mine, so 
do not consider me as possessing it; it belongs to the position. 

“T  h  e    S  e  c  o  n  d    P  e  r  s  o  n  a  l  i  t  y  :  Through  Almighty  God’s  grace,  a 
personality  is given me at the time of worship, when I am turned towards the Divine 
Court; this personality displays certain marks. These marks arise from “knowing one’s 
faults, realizing one’s want and impotence, and seeking refuge in utter humility at the 
Divine Court,” which are the basis and meaning of worship. Through this personality, I 
know  myself  to  be  more  wretched,  powerless,  wanting,  and  faulty  than  everyone. 
Should the whole world praise and applaud me, they could not make me believe that I 
am good or possess perfection of any sort. 

“T h e  T h i r d : I have my true personality, that is, the degenerate personality of 
the Old Said, that is, certain veins of character inherited from the Old Said. Sometimes 
it inclines to hypocrisy and desires rank and position. Also, because I do not come of a 
noble family, lowly  

 

430

characteristics are to be observed, like my being frugal to the point of miserliness. My 
brothers! I am not going to describe the many secret faults and ills of this personality, 
lest I chase you away altogether. ...  Almighty God has compassionately demonstrated 
His  power  in  me  so that He employs my personality, which is like that of the lowest 
common  soldier,  in  serving  the  mysteries  of  the  Qur’an,  which  resembles  the  most 
exalted  position  of  field  marshal.  Thanks  be  to  God  a  hundred  thousand  times!  The 
soul is baser than everything, and the duty higher...” 

All praise be to God, this is from the bounty of my Sustainer! 

* * * 

 [This is a piece that badly scared the court, so that they recorded it against 
us  in  the  judgement.  However,  those  vehement  words  were  written  fifteen 
years ago and were afterwards softened with the following.] 

This  sentence  should  make  them  see  fairly:  “My  brothers!  For  the  sake  of  the 
innocent  and  the  elderly,  don’t  take  revenge  on  those  who  kill  me  wrongfully.  The 
torments of the grave and Hell are enough for them.”  

“In  view  of the  treatment  you  have  meted out to me, and your beliefs, I oppose 
you in general fashion. You are sacrificing your religion and life in the hereafter for the 
sake of your lives in this world. According to you, due to the opposition between us 
and  contrary  to  you,  we  are  always  ready  to  sacrifice  our  lives  in  this  world  for  our 
religion and for the hereafter. To sacrifice two or three years of humiliating life under 
your  domination  in  order  to  win  sacred  martyrdom,  is  like  the  water  of  Kawthar for 
us. However,  in  order to make you tremble, relying on the effulgence and indications 
of the All-Wise Qur’an, I tell you this with certainty: 

“You  shall  not  live  after  killing  me!  You  shall  be  driven  out  of  the world,  your 
Paradise  and  your  beloved,  by  an  irresistible  hand,  and  swiftly  cast  into  everlasting 
darkness. Behind me, your Nimrod-like chiefs will be quickly killed and sent to me. In 
the  Divine  presence  I  shall  grasp  hold  of  the  scruffs  of  their  necks,  and  on  Divine 
justice casting them down to the lowest of the low, I shall take my revenge!  

“O you miserable wretches who sell religion and your lives in the hereafter for this 
world! If you want to live, do not interfere with me! Know that if you do, vengeance 
shall be taken on you many times over, and tremble! I hope from Divine mercy that my 
death will serve religion more than my life, and my death explode over your heads like 
a bomb,  

431

* * * 

* * * 

 

scattering  you!  Cause  me  trouble  if  you  have  the  courage!  If  you  do  anything,  you 
shall see!” It concludes with a Qur’anic verse. 

 [The court recorded this against me, despite being a passage which accuses 
them of being extreme.] 

In  Ankara,  Mustafa  Kemal  entered  the  office  of  the  Speaker  of  the  Assembly 
furiously angry. He said: “We summoned you here in order to explain your important 
ideas  to  us.  But  you  came  and  wrote  things  about  the  five  daily  prayers,  and  sowed 
discord amongst us.” Although Said told him: “Those who do not perform the prayers 
are traitors, and the pronouncements of traitors are to be rejected,” by way of apology 
Mustafa  Kemal  swallowed  his  anger.  Although  his  feelings  and  principles  had  been 
wounded,  no  one  laid  a  finger  on  the  Old  Said,  those  imperious  commanders  were 
even frightened of him. It is written that this occurred through the wondrous power of 
the future collective personality of the Risale-i Nur’s future heroic students, and was a 
shining instance of the Risale-i Nur’s wonder-working. 

 [A  passage  which  was  recorded  against  us,  but  which  makes  the  court 
guilty.] 

It  is  said  “We  do  not  support  either  intellectually  or  on  scholarly  grounds  the 
arbitrary  commands,  called  laws,  of  the  commander  who  made  Aya  Sophia  into  a 
house of idols and the Shaykh al-Islam’s Office into a girls’ high school, and in respect 
of my person, I do not act in accordance with them.” 

It is said in his petition dated 29.8.1948: “An idea occurred to me, it was like this: 
the fact that although for the good of the nation and country the Government should 
be  protecting  and  helping  me,  it  is  oppressing  me,  suggests  that  the  secret  atheistic 
organization  which  struggles  against  me  together  with  the  section  of  the  communist 
organization which has combined with that organization have gained hold of important 
official  positions  and  are  now  confronting  me.  As  for  the  Government,  either  it  is 
uninformed of this, or it permits it. Could it possibly be a crime not to love a man who 
has turned Aya Sophia into a house of idols, which is an  

 

eternal  source  of  pride  for  an  heroic  nation,  and  a  shining  decoration  in  the  world 
showing its service of the Qur’an and jihad, and a vast and precious souvenir of their 
swords, and has turned too the Shaykh al-Islam’s Office into a girls’ high school?” 

[The piece the court reckoned was the most likely to have Said convicted. It 
attached entirely the wrong meaning to these words, which Said had used in 
Denizli  Court  against  his  covert  enemies;  and  altering  it  to  refer  to  the 
Government, put it forward as a reason for his conviction.] 

He called “some of the new laws of the State, which has carried out the reforms, 
‘arbitrary compulsion on account of disbelief;’ the Republic, ‘absolute despotism;’ the 
regime, ‘absolute apostasy and communism;’ and civilization, ‘absolute dissipation.’”  

432

* * * 

* * * 

[A  piece  included  with  astonishment  and  appreciation  in  the  court’s 
decision.] 

Writing out the Risale-i  Nur yields numerous benefits, both in this world and 

in the next. These are: 

1. To strive morally against the people of misguidance. 
2. To assist Üstad Bediuzzaman in disseminating the truth. 
3. To serve Muslims in respect of belief. 
4. To acquire knowledge through the pen. 
5.  To  practise worship in the form of reflective thought, one hour of which may 

on occasion be the equivalent of a year’s worship. 
6. To enter the grave in a state of belief. 

It also yields five sorts of worldly benefits:  

1. Plenty in one’s sustenance. 
2. Ease of mind and happiness. 
3. Plenty in one’s livelihood. 
4. Success in what one does. 
5.  By  virtue  of  being  a  Risale-i  Nur  student,  to  share  in  the  prayers  and 
supplications offered by all Risale-i Nur students. This will soon be understood by the 
young, and the university will turn into a Risale-i Nur school. 

 

433

 [It is astonishing but they considered this sincere devotion to be a crime.] 

One  of  the  two  plans  followed  by  the  covert  dissemblers:  To  destroy  my  good 

name; as though in that way the Risale-i Nur would be depreciated. 

The  Second:    To  prevent  the  spread  of  the  Risale-i  Nur by  causing  the  Risale-i 
Nur students to become anxious and slack. Never fear! Let the heads of wretches like 
ourselves be sacrificed for a sacred truth for which millions of heroic heads have been 
sacrificed! 

* * * 

 [It is extraordinary but Hasan Feyzi’s most sincere and entirely true preface 
and  eulogy,  which  was  conformable  with  reality  and  of  no  harm  but  great 
benefit to many, was said to constitute an offence, and on its being included 
at  the  end  of  one  of  the  collections  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  was  given  as  the 
reason for the collection’s seizure.] 

Hasan Feyzi wrote a letter, a summary of which is this: 
“O  Risale-i  Nur!  There  is  no  doubt  that  you  are  the  tongue  of  Truth,  and 
inspiration  of  Truth,  and  have  been  written  with  His  permission.”  “I  am  no  one’s 
property.  I  was  taken  from  no  book,  I  was  stolen  from  no  work.  I  belong  to  the 
Sustainer  and  to  the  Qur’an.  I am a wondrous Light pouring forth from an immortal 
work.”  “You  are  a  most  effulgent  book  of  truth  and  mercy.  You  adorn  and  honour 
some  of  your  special,  sincere students with the decorations of the saints and purified 
scholars. Moreover, your treatises have not entered the courts as a criminal or suspect, 
but as a teacher, instructor, and guide. In every session of justice you have displayed 
splendidly,  brilliantly,  your  power  and  forcefulness,  your  greatness  and  pride.  You 
laved them with the water of belief and the Qur’an.” 

“O  Ustad,  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  Servant  and  Interpreter!  Ustad,  God’s  servant, 
spiritual son of Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him), and disciple of Gawth al-
A‘zam  (May  his  mystery  be  sanctified)!  Raise  me  to  the  elevated  degree  of  your 
knowledge!”  “Only  a  month’s  worth  of  provisions,  around  a  kilo,  wrapped  in  paper 
and hanging from a nail. He attains to an inexhaustible existence within his deprivation. 
He  abstains from accepting gifts. If he had accepted alms and charity, he would have 
been a millionaire today.” 

 

434

[They questioned only one of the reasons for the naming of the Risale-i Nur. 
They  said  that  they  saw  no  one  with  the  name  of  Nur  among  his  close 
students. As it says in the reply in the footnote, Nuri Benli and Küreli Nuri 
the  Clockmaker  are  now  distinguished  in  their  service  of  the  Risale-i  Nur. 
That  is  to  say,  they  cannot  criticize  it,  so  are  compelled  to  base  their 
allegations on the most trivial matters.] 

The  reason  that  in  the  Twenty-Sixth  Word,  the  thirty-three  Words,  thirty-three 
Letters,  thirty-one  Flashes,  and  thirteen  Rays  are  called  the  Risale-i  Nur  is  this: 
throughout my life the word ‘Nur’ (light) has everywhere confronted me. For instance, 
my  village  was  Nurs,  my  late  mother’s  name  was  Nuriye,  my  Naqshi  master  was 
Sayyid  Nur  Muhammad,  one  of my Qadiri masters was Nuruddin, one of my Qur’an 
masters was Nuri, and of my students those most attached to me have been those with 
Nur  in  their  names.  (But  how  strange  it  is  that  there  is  no  one  among  the  important 
Risale-i  Nur  students  with  the  name  Nuri.)34  And  what  elucidates  and  illumines  my 
books  most  are  the  comparisons  about  light.  And  what  has  solved  most  of  my 
difficulties related  to the Divine truths is the luminous Name of Nur, out of the Most 
Beautiful Names. And my particular leader in my passionate enthusiasm for the Qur’an 
and  my  restricting  my  service  to  it,  is  ‘Uthman  Dhi’l-Nurayn  (May  God  be  pleased 
with him). 

* * * 

[Hücumat-i  Sitte  (The  Six  Attacks)  and  its  Addendum  were  both  written 
twenty years ago, and in the face of fierce and tyrannical aggression, and are 
highly  confidential,  and  were  written  when  I  was  angry,  and  during  the 
Second  World  War,  all  of  which  justify  the  anger.  So  it  is  far  from  any 
justice  to  look  on  it  as  a  crime  as  though  it  had  been  written  now,  and  to 
seize it.] 

Written at the head of the Addendum to the Six Attacks is this: “This Addendum 
was  written  in  order  to  avoid  the  disgust  and  insults  that  will  levelled  at  us  in  the 
future.  That  is  to  say,  it  was  written  so  that  when  it  is  said:  ‘Look  at  the  spineless 
people of that age!’, their spit should not hit us in the face, or else to wipe it off. Let 
the ears ring of the leaders of Europe, savage beneath their humanitarian masks! And 
let  this  be  thrust  in  the  unseeing  eyes  of  those  unjust  oppressors  who  inflicted  these 
unscrupulous tyrants on us! It is a petition with which to hit over the head  

                                             

34 At that time it was thus; now twenty years have passed. 

 

435

the  followers  of  modern  low  civilization,  who  this  century  have  a  hundred  thousand 
times over necessitated the existence of Hell.” 

“Recently,  the  concealed  aggression  of  the  irreligious  has  taken  on  a  most  ugly 
form;  tyrannical  aggression  against  the  unfortunate  people  of  belief  and  against 
religion. Our private and unofficial call to prayer and iqama was interrupted during the 
private  worship  of  myself  and  one  or  two  brothers  in  the  mosque  I  myself  repaired. 
‘Why  are  you  reciting  the  iqama  in  Arabic  and  making  the  call  to  prayer  secretly?’ 
they  asked.  My  patience  was  exhausted  in  keeping  silent.  So  I  say,  not  to  those 
unscrupulous vile men who are not worth addressing, but to the heads of the Pharaoh-
like  society  who  with  arbitrary  despotism  plays  with  the  fate  of  this  nation:  O  you 
people of innovation who have deviated from the straight path of religion, I want the 
answer to six questions. 

“The  First:    Every  government  in  the  world,  every  people  which  rules,  even 
cannibals,  and  the  chief  of  a  band  of  brigands,  have  some  principle,  some  law,  by 
which  they  rule.  So  according  to  which principle do you carry out this extraordinary 
aggression?  Show  your  law!  Or  do  you  accept  as  the  law  the  arbitrary  whims  of  a 
handful of contemptible officials? Because no law can interrupt private worship in that 
way; there cannot be such a law!” 

* * * 

[It is regretable that they objected to one or two sentences in Isharat-i Seb‘a 
(The  Seven  Signs),  which  is  both  old,  and  confidential,  and  true,  and  that 
they attempted to have it seized and us prosecuted. But the truth it contains is 
so  powerful  it  should  be  proclaimed  to  all  the  world  and  mankind  for  the 
good of society.] 

“The  biggest  fool  in  the  world  is  he  who  expects  progress,  prosperity,  and 
happiness  from  irreligious  anarchists  like  them.  One  of  those  fools  who  occupied  a 
high  position,  said:  ‘We  said  “Allah!  Allah!”  and  remained  backward.  Europe  said 
“Guns and cannons,” and advanced.’ 

“According  to  the  rule,  ‘a  fool  should be answered with silence,’ the answer for 
such people is silence. But because behind certain fools are inauspicious clever people, 
we say this: 

“O you wretches! This world is a guest-house. Every day with their corpses, thirty 
thousand witnesses put their signature to the decree ‘Death is a reality’ and they testify 
to  the  assertion.  Can  you  kill  death?  Can  you  contradict  these  witnesses?  Since  you 
can’t, death causes people to say: ‘Allah! Allah!’ Which of your guns and cannons can 
illuminate the ever 

 

436

lasting darkness confronting someone in the throes of death in place of ‘Allah! Allah!’, 
and  transform  his  absolute  despair  into  absolute  hope?  Since  there  is  death  and  we 
shall  enter  the  grave,  and  this  life  departs  and  an  eternal  life  comes,  if  guns  and 
cannons are said once, ‘Allah! Allah!’ should be said a thousand times.” 

*  *  * 

 [It  is  amazing  but  they  turned  around  a  sentence  in  the  Sixteenth  Flash 
which  was  in  our  favour,  so  that  it  was  against  us,  and  showed  they  were 
inclined to seize that valuable treatise.] 

From the Sixteenth Flash: “As for the calamity of war, it would cause great harm 
to our service of the Qur’an. ...  Like the One Powerful Over All Things sweeps and 
cleans in a minute the atmosphere filled with clouds and shows the shining sun in clear 
skies, so He may also dispel these black and merciless clouds and show the truths of 
the Shari‘a like the sun, and give them without expense or trouble. We await it from 
His mercy that He will not sell them to us expensively. May He give intelligence to the 
heads  of  those  at  the  top,  and  belief  to  their  hearts;  that  would  be  enough.  Then 
matters would put themselves to rights.” 

“Since  what  you  hold  in  your  hand  is  light,  not  a  club,  and  light  cannot  be 
objected  to,  nor  fled  from,  nor  can  harm  come  from  showing  it,  why  do  you  advise 
caution  to  your  friends,  and  prevent  them  showing  many  light-filled  parts  of  the 
Risale-i Nur to people?” 

“The heads of most of those at the top are drunk and they cannot read them. And 
even  if  they  do  read  them,  they  cannot  understand  them;  they  give  them  the  wrong 
meaning, and interfere. In order that they do not interfere, they should not be shown 
them until they come to their senses. ...  Therefore, I advise my brothers to be cautious 
and not to give the truths to those who are unfit...”  

* * * 

[Although  the  veiling  of  women  is  a  Qur’anic  command,  and  a  most 
powerful reply has been given concerning it, and the piece was written long 
ago, and a prison-sentence has been served for it, they are again citing it as 
an  offence.  They  are  also  calling  a  criminal  offence,  and  attempting  to 
confiscate,  a  truth  written  on  its  own  from  the  Treatise  For  The  Elderly 
which is of the greatest value and useful for everyone and was included in A 
Guide For Youth. These show that they have been unable to find anything.] 

 

437

After explaining that the veiling of women is a command of the Qur’an, it says in 
the  Twenty-Fourth  Flash,  which  is  about  that  subject:  “The  fact  that,  according  to 
news received, the bare-legged wife of a high-ranking man in the world was accosted 
by  a  common  shoe-shiner  in  the  country’s  capital,  in  the  market-place  in  daylight  in 
front of everyone, deals a slap in the shameless faces of those opposed to the veiling of 
women!” 

While in the Twenty-Sixth Flash, about the Elderly, it says: “I climbed to the top 
of  Ankara  citadel,  which  was  far  more  aged,  dilapidated,  and  worn  out  than  me.  It 
seemed to me to be formed of petrified historical events. The old age of the season of 
the year together with my old age, the citadel’s old age, mankind’s old age, the old age 
of the glorious Ottoman Empire, and the death of the Caliphate’s rule, and the world’s 
old age all caused me to look in the most grieved, piteous and melancholy state in that 
lofty citadel at the valleys of the past and the mountains of the future. ... As I sought 
consolation looking to the right, that is, to the past, my father and forefathers and the 
human race appeared in the form of a vast grave and filled me with gloom rather than 
consoling  me.  ...  I  looked  at  the  present  day.  It  appeared  ...    as  a  coffin  bearing  my 
half-dead, suffering and desperately struggling corpse.” 

* * * 

 [They criticized the following where they should have applauded it, citing it 
as an offence.] 

“I spent most of the salary I had received from the Darü’l-Hikmeti’l-Islamiye, and 
had  put  aside  a  small  amount  to  go  on  the  Hajj.  Through  the  plenty  resulting  from 
frugality  and  contentment,  that  scanty  money  was  sufficient  for  me.  It  prevented  me 
being humiliated. There is still a little left of that blessed money.” 

It is written that the Twenty-Second Flash is marked as confidential and is for my 
closest and most sincere and loyal students: “First Indication: Why is it that although 
you  do  not  interfere  in  the  world  of  the  worldly,  they  interfere  in  your  hereafter  on 
every opportunity?” “It is the authorities of the province of Isparta and its people that 
should answer this question.” 

 

438

 [Those  who  deemed  a  crime  this  innocent,  sincere,  astonishing  hope  and 
desire,  born  of  the  compassion  resulting  from  belief,  are  surely  themselves 
guilty of a crime.] 

Said  says  in  one  of  his  signed  letters:  “I  used  to  be  astonished  at  the  innocent 
seven  to  ten-year-old  children  who  would  run  up  to  me  when  they  saw  me  driving 
around in the phaeton and hold onto my hands, and I wondered what the reason was. 
Then suddenly it was imparted to me that “with a premonition of the future, the group 
of young innocents sensed that through the Risale-i Nur they would find happiness and 
would be saved from spiritual dangers.” 

* * * 

 [To deem this piece a crime although the beginning is in my favour and the 
end is a wish and hope, is beyond all fairness.] 

It is written that a number of verses and Hadiths allude unanimously to a luminous 
truth this century, and point to a supreme regenerator of religion who is to come at the 
end of time; that the most important of the three duties of that person and community 
will  be  to  save  belief,  and  that  there  will  be  no  harm  in  their  disregarding  the  two 
duties which dominate the broad sphere, such as reviving the Shari‘a and setting up the 
caliphate.  However,  this  might  lead  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  opponents,  particularly  the 
politicians, to criticize and attack it, for which reason he has cut out a part of the short 
treatise of our precise brothers, together with some of its sentences, and will send it in 
amended form. 

In  a  signed  letter,  Said  Nursi  writes:  “The  fact  that  the  verses  Verily  We  have 
granted you a manifest victory; * And that God may help you with powerful help35 in 
Qur’anic  script  over  the  gate  of  War  Ministry,  which  was  made  into  the  University, 
were covered over by marble slabs and have now been brought to light, is a sign of the 
Qur’anic script again being permitted, and the aim followed by the Risale-i Nur being 
achieved. It is also a sign that the university will become a Risale-i Nur ‘Medrese’.” 

                                             

35 Qur’an, 48:1, 3. 

 

439

 [This is Husrev’s  footnote at the end of my letter entitled The ‘Takbirs’ of 
the  Hajjis,  which  furnishes  a  perfect  reply  to  their  criticisms  of  my 
explanations.] 

In the letter signed by Said  Nursi, with the heading ‘The takbirs of the Hajjis on 
Arafat,’  is  the  reply  to  “a  significant  number  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  asking 
persistently about a prominent guide from the Family of the Prophet who is to come at 
the end of time; they suppose you to be him. For your part, you consistently refuse to 
accept their ideas, and shrink from such a suggestion. This is a contradiction. We want 
the answer to this matter.”   

The reply: The collective personality of the sacred community which the Mahdi 
descended  from  God’s  Messenger  will  represent  will  have  three  functions:  to  save 
belief,  to  revive  the  marks  of  Islam  under  the  title  of  the  caliphate  of  Muhammad 
(PBUH),  and  to  modify  to  some  extent  the  laws  of  the  Shari‘a  of  Muhammad 
(PBUH).  He will attempt to carry out this vast duty. Since the  Risale-i Nur students 
see  the  first  duty  completely  in  the  Risale-i  Nur,  saying  that  the  second  and  third 
duties are in second and third place, they rightly suppose the Risale-i Nur’s collective 
personality to be a sort of Mahdi. Since some of them suppose its wretched Interpreter 
is a representative of that collective personality, they sometimes call him by the same 
name.  Indeed,  they  say  that  through  interpretation  and  investigation  it  is  understood 
from  the  predictions  of  some  of  the  saints that the Risale-i Nur is that very  guide of 
the end of time. There is confusion on two points, and they have to be interpreted. 

The First: In reality the latter two duties are not of the same degree as the former. 
However,  influenced  by  this  century’s  ideas  in  particular  the  mass  of  people  and the 
politicians  consider  the  caliphate  of  Muhammad  (PBUH)  and  Islamic  Unity  to  be 
immeasurably  more  extensive  than  the  first  duty.  Every  century  a  sort  of  Mahdi  and 
Regenerator who gave guidance has appeared, but since they have performed only one 
of the three functions, they have not been given the title of the Great Mahdi. 

The  Second:  That  supreme  person  of  the  Last  Days  will  be  a  descendant  of the 
Prophet (PBUH). For sure I am like a spiritual son of Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased 
with  him),  and  I  have  received  instruction  from  him  in  the  realities;  and  since  in one 
sense  the  Family  of  Muhammad  (PBUH)  includes  true  Risale-i  Nur  students,  I  too 
may be thought of as belonging to the Prophet’s Family. But it is not permissible in the 
Risale-i Nur way to desire any sort of egotism or  personality or personal rank, or to 
win fame and renown. Even if rank in the hereafter were given me, I would feel myself 
compelled to leave it aside in order not to spoil the  

 

sincerity of the Risale-i Nur. A semi-consenting reply is given,36 and the ascription of 
Mahdiship is clearly and decisively rejected. 

440

* * * 

[The  events  in  this  piece  are  facts,  and since in extraordinary fashion three 
minutes after my saying: Don’t upset me, the earth will become angry!, there 
was an earthquake, this should be applauded in amazement, as is demanded 
by compassion, and not be made the object of criticism.] 

It is said: “Ten hours after having given my statement for four hours and suffering 
considerable  discomfort,  virtually  at  the  same  time,  the  fire  in  the  Ministry  of 
Education broke out, which caused loss worth two million liras and demonstrated that 
the Risale-i Nur is a means of repulsing calamities. For if it is attacked, the calamities 
find a way and strike.” 

In letter number one hundred and forty-one, it proves that the fires in the Ministry 
of Education in Ankara and in a garage, in a factory in Izmir, and a  large building in 
Adana  being  burnt  to  the  ground  after  I  had  given  my  statement  for  four  and  a  half 
hours were not coincidence, then it says: “Don’t deprive me of my treatises, or both I 
and  this  country  will  pay  for  it;  the  earth  will vent its anger with earthquakes. Three 
minutes  after  saying  this  an  earthquake occurred which lasted three seconds, and the 
Ministry  of  Education  was  engulfed  in  flames; numerous  earthquakes have coincided 
with  aggression  against  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  its  students,  as  has  been  proved  four 
times  by  courts  of  law,  which  cannot  be  chance  or  coincidence.  Numerous  incidents 
have  shown  that  the  Risale-i  Nur  is  a  means  of  calamities  being  repulsed  in  this 
country.” 

In letter number one hundred and forty-seven: “This time, the winter displayed its 
fury when we were attacked. The weather raged with storm and was bitterly cold, but 
when the assaults ceased and the Nurjus experienced an expansiveness, those bitterly 
cold  days  began  to  smile  like  the  first  days  of  spring.  ...  The  burning  down  of  the 
Ministry of Education was a universal blow. 

                                             

name of the Risale-i Nur students. 

36 Inequitable Court! Could there be any reply more decisive than this? Signed, Husrev, in the 

 

441

 [A situation worthy of congratulation should not be objected to.] 

One of the numerous meaningless questions they asked me this time in court, was: 
“How do you live?” I replied: “Through the plenty resulting from frugality. A person 
who one Ramadan in Isparta lived on one loaf of bread, a one-kilo bag of yoghurt, and 
one kilo of rice would not stoop to embracing the world for his livelihood and would 
not be obliged to accept gifts.” 

* * * 

[As with the defence Zübeyir37 read in court, his brilliant eulogy drove them 
to appreciate it, God willing, for amazed, they included it in the judgement.] 

In  a  section  with  the  heading:  “Our  young  people  want  to  be  taught  truth  and 
realitiy, and to have the highest morality,” on page thirteen, Zübeyir Gündüzalp wrote 
by typewriter: “The Risale-i Nur is a masterpiece written not through the author’s will, 
but  inspired  by  the  Creator, in order to save the Muslims of the 20th century and all 
humanity from the dark, oppressive ideas.” 

On  page  twelve:  “If  it  was  said  to  a  person  serving  the Risale-i Nur: ‘Copy out 
these books instead of the Risale-i Nur, and I’ll give all the wealth of Ford,’ he would 
reply, without even raising the nib of his pen: ‘If you  gave me all the world’s wealth 
and its sovereignty too, I would not accept it.’” 

On page fifteen: “If we are attached to honest writers a hundred times over, our 
attachment  to  a  great  person  like  Bediuzzaman  who  guides  us  in  this  world  and the 
next, is immeasurable, total.” 

On page twelve: “The collective personality of the Risale-i Nur has diagnosed the 
social,  spiritual,  and  religious  sicknesses  of  this  age,  and  at  a  Divine  command  has 
offered to all humanity at this time the All-Wise Qur’an’s truths in a way that will cure 
its chronic social ills.” 

On page forty-four: “Bediuzzaman said that someone who studies these treatises 

for a year may become an important scholar. Yes, that is how it is.” 

On page fifty-four: “The judges who study the Risale-i Nur do not make incorrect 

judgements.” 

                                             

37 Zübeyir Gündüzalp (1920-1971) was born in Konya Province, and became a student of 
Bediuzzaman while working as a telegraphist for the Post Office. He later became one of his closest 
students, displaying complete devotion to Bediuzzaman and sincerity in his service of the Risale-i 
Nur. He became one of the leading figures of the movement after Bediuzzaman’s death. [Tr.] 

 

442

 [This  piece  is  entirely  in  my  favour  and  is  the  exact  truth,  and  should  not 
have been included with the offences in the court’s decision.] 

Ahmed  Feyzi  amended  part  of  his  work,  but  having  to  hurry  he  sent  it  without 
completing  the  corrections. In  it,  it  is  said:  “Does  it  not infer by ignoring Saraçoglu, 
who  calls  religion  and  the  training  of  Muhammad  ‘poison’,  and  disputing  The 
Illuminating Lamp, which demonstrates the Qur’anic reality as clearly as the sun and 
proves  it  to  be  the  perfect  cure  for  mankind’s  wounds,  that  you  are  assisting  in  the 
confiscation of that collection?” 

It says the following in the conclusion of one of his defence speeches, presented to 
the  court  on  an  unknown  date.  He  stated  that  neither  himself  nor  the  students  were 
occupied  with  politics;  the  writings  shown  to  be  aggressive  were  confidential;  there 
was  freedom  of  thought  and  of  conscience;  that  even  if  the  above  appeared  to  be 
criticism  of  some  laws,  this  did  not  constitute  a  crime;  many  of  the  treatises  under 
consideration  were  written  a  long  time  previously;  they  had  been  scrutinized  by 
committees  of  experts  and  had  been  found  to  be  harmless;  that  just  as  there  had 
previously been convictions for them in Eskişehir Court, so they had been acquitted in 
Denizli Court, so it was not right that they should be tried again for the same offence; 
the  Risale-i  Nur  students  had  up  to  now  been  involved  in  no  activities  that  would 
disturb public order; and that since no one was named explicitly in the Fifth Ray and its 
purpose was only to inform, this did not constitute a crime either. 

Further examples may be thought of in the same way. 

                                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i  

 

443

To the Judges of the Court of Appeal 

[Again  they  did  not  permit  me  to  speak  in  the  session  held  to  discuss  the 
possible  quashing  by  the  Appeal  Court  of  Afyon  Court’s  unjust  decision 
concerning  us.  They  made  us  listen  to  a  third  severe  indictment.  They  also 
did  not  allow  anyone  to  come  to  help  me  with  writing.  Despite  my  poor 
handwriting  and  my being ill, I  am  presenting this  complaint to  your Court 
—which has acted justly  towards us twice previously— as a supplement to 
my petition concerning the appeal.] 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

A  petition  to  the  Supreme  Tribunal  of  the  Resurrection;  and  a  complaint  to  the 
Divine  Court;  the  Appeal  Court  of  the  present  should  also  listen  as  well  as  coming 
generations and the enlightened future teachers and students of the universities. Of the 
hundreds  of  torments  and  calamities  I  have  suffered  these  twenty-three  years,  I  am 
setting ten before the court of justice of the All-Glorious Sovereign together with my 
complaints. 

The First: Despite my faults, I have dedicated my life to this nation’s happiness 
and the saving of its religious belief. Saying, let my head too be sacrificed for a truth, 
that is, the truth of the Qur’an, for which millions of heroic heads have been sacrificed, 
I  worked  with  the  Risale-i  Nur  with  all  my  strength.  Through  Divine  assistance,  I 
persisted in the face of all the cruel torments. I did not withdraw. 

For  example:  One  instance  of  the  exceedingly  cruel  treatment  I  have  received 
during  my  trial  and  imprisonment  in  Afyon:  although  three  times,  and every time for 
nearly two hours, they forced myself and the innocent Risale-i Nur students, who were 
awaiting  solace  from  justice,  to  listen  to  the  slanderous,  malicious  indictments,  they 
did  not  allow  us  more  than  one  or  two  minutes  to  defend  our  rights,  despite  my 
repeated requests for five or ten minutes. 

I have been kept for twenty months in total isolation, with only one or two of my 
friends being permitted to visit me for three or four hours. For only a small part of my 
defence  speeches  did  I  have  anyone  to  help  me  with  the  writing.  Then  they  were 
forbidden  as  well,  and  punished  exceedingly  brutally.  They  compelled  us  to  listen  to 
the  prosecutor’s  biased  indictment,  which  was  like  water  gathered  from  a  thousand 
streams, and which I proved contained eighty-one errors in fifteen pages arising from  

 

444

twisted  meanings  and  slander  and  lies.  They  did  not  permit  me  to  speak. If they had 
permitted me, I would have said: 

Although  as  required  by  freedom  of thought and freedom of conscience, you do 
not  interfere  with  Jews,  Christians,  and  Zoroastrians,  and  particularly  now  with 
anarchists,  apostates,  and  dissemblers,  hiding  behind  the  screen  of  communism,  who 
both deny your religion, and insult your forefathers accusing them of misguidance, and 
accept neither your Prophet (PBUH) nor the laws of the Qur’an; and although through 
the  Qur’an’s  instruction  millions  of  Muslims  in  the  lands  and  under  the  rule  of  an 
imperious,  bigoted  Christian  state  like  Britain,  reject  all  the  false  beliefs  and  infidel 
rules of the English, their courts do not interfere with them; and although opponents of 
all governments openly publish their ideas without those governments bothering them; 
and  although  both  the  Isparta  authorities,  and  Denizli  Court,  and  Ankara  Criminal 
Court, and the Directorate of Religious Affairs, and the Appeal Court twice, no, three 
times, have all scrutinized these forty years of my life, and my one hundred and thirty 
treatises, and my most private treatises and letters, and they had in their possession for 
two  or  three  years  all  the  copies  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  confidential  and  otherwise,  yet 
they  could  not  show  a  single  matter  necessitating  the  smallest  penalty;  and  although 
despite  the  fact  I  am  extremely  weak,  oppressed,  defeated,  and  am  enduring  the 
harshest conditions, our innocence has been proved by the Risale-i Nur collections you 
hold as well as our four-hundred-page defence, which have been shown to be a most 
powerful,  sound,  and  veracious  guide  for  two  hundred  thousand  true  and  devoted 
students  benefiting  this  country,  nation,  and  public  security;  —  in  spite  of  all  these, 
under  which  law,  what  conscience,  what  good,  what  crime  do  you  convict  us, 
contemptuously  giving  us  the  harshest  sentences  and  severest  solitary  confinement? 
Certainly you shall be questioned about this at the Last Judgement.  

The Second: One reason they put forward for punishing me was my expounding 
the Qur’an’s explicit verses about veiling, inheritance, recitation of the Divine Names, 
and polygamy, written to silence those who object to them in the name of civilization. 

Fifteen  years  ago  I  wrote  the  following piece to Eskişehir Court and the Appeal 
Court,  which  was  also  included  in  the  court’s  decision.  I  repeat  the  piece  as  a 
complaint  to  the  Supreme  Tribunal  at  the  Last  Judgement,  and  as  a  warning  to  the 
enlightened teachers of the future, and together with Elhüccetü’z-Zehrâ (The Shining 
Proof) as a sort of addition to my petition to the Appeal Court, which twice has acted 
fairly in acquitting me and has listened to my cry for justice, and to the committee of  

 

445

judges  who  did  not  permit  me  to  speak  and  due  to the  malicious  indictment which I 
proved  contained  eighty  errors,  convicted  me  to  two  year’s  hard  labour  and  solitary 
confinement together with two year’s further exile elsewhere under close surveillance:  
I say this that if there is any justice on the face of the earth, the Appeal Court will 
quash this decision which convicts someone who expounded Qur’anic verses which in 
each century for one thousand three hundred and fifty years have acted as sacred, true 
Divine  principles  in  the  social  life  of  three  hundred  and  fifty  million  Muslims,  and 
expounded  them  relying  on  the  consensus  and  affirmation  of three  hundred  and  fifty 
thousand  Qur’anic  commentaries  and  following  the  beliefs  of  our  forefathers  for one 
thousand three hundred years. Is it not a denial of Islam and a betrayal of our millions 
of  religious  and  heroic  forefathers  to  convict,  because  he  expounded  those  verses, 
someone who according to reason and learning does not accept certain European laws 
applied  temporarily  due  to  certain  requirements  of  the  times  and  who  has  given  up 
politics  and  withdrawn  from  social  life,  and  is  it  not  to  insult  millions  of  Qur’anic 
commentaries? 

The Third: One reason they cited for our conviction was breaching security and 
disturbing public order. Putting forward the remotest possibility, one in a hundred or 
even a thousand, in place of actual events, and putting the wrong meanings on forty to 
fifty  words  from  some  confidential  treatises  and  private  letters  out  of  the  hundred 
thousand words and sentences of the Risale-i Nur, they present these as evidence, and 
accusing us want to have us punished. 

Calling  to  witness  those  who  have  known  my  life  these  thirty  to forty years and 
the  thousands  of  ‘special’  (has)38  students  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  I  say:  to  accuse  of 
disturbing  public  order  someone  who,  —at  a  time  the  commander  of  the  British 
occupation forces in Istanbul was sowing discord among Muslims, even deceiving the 
Shaykh al-Islam and some leading men of religion and inciting the Committee of Union 
and Progress and the Freedom and Accord Party to struggle against each other, thus 
paving the way for the Greek victory and defeat of the National Movement,— foiled 
that insidious plan of the commander by printing and publishing through the efforts of 
Eshref  Edib  his  work  Hutuvat-i  Sitte  (The  Six  Steps)  against  the  British  and Greeks, 
not retreating even in the face of threat of execution; who did not flee to Ankara even 
when summoned  

                                             

38 In his writings, Bediuzzaman mentions ‘has’ (special) by which he probably meant those that 

loyally and devotedly served the Risale-i Nur, and ‘erkan’ (leading; lit. ‘pillars’), those who in 
addition to their devoted service played a more organizing role. [Tr.] 

 

446

because of the above service by the leaders there; who attached no importance when a 
prisoner-of-war  to  the  Russian  Commander-in-Chief’s  order  for  his  execution;  who 
with  a  speech  during  the  Thirty-First  of  March  Incident  induced  eight  regiments  to 
obey  their  officers;39  and  in  the  Military  Court,  disregarding  the  threat  of  execution 
said in reply to the presiding pashas’ questions of: “You too are a reactionary, you too 
wanted the Shari‘a?”, “If constitutionalism consists of one party’s despotism, then let 
all men and jinn witness that I am a reactionary and ready to sacrifice my very soul for 
a  single  matter  of  the  Shari‘a,”  causing  those  high-ranking  officers to appreciate and 
admire him, and while expecting his  execution, they decided on his acquittal, then on 
being released, he did not thank them  but went on his way shouting: “Long live Hell 
for all tyrants!”; and as is written in the decision of Afyon Court, when Mustafa Kemal 
angrily said to him in the office of the Speaker of the Assembly:40 “We summoned you 
here so you would tell us of your elevated ideas, but you came and wrote some things 
about  the  five  daily  prayers  and  sowed  conflict  among  us,”  he  replied:  “After  belief, 
the obligatory prayers are the most elevated question. Those who do not perform the 
prayers are traitors, and the pronouncements of traitors are to be rejected;” who said 
this in the presence of forty to fifty deputies, and forced that fearsome commander to 
swallow his anger and make a sort of apology; and in connection with whom not one 
matter has been recorded by the police and authorities of six provinces connected with 
the disturbance  of public order; and among whose hundreds of thousands of students 
not  the  smallest  incident  has  been  witnessed  (apart  from  one  insignificant  incident 
concerning  a  rightful  defence  in  which  one  unimportant  student  was  involved);  in 
connection  with  none  of  whose  students  any  crime  has  been  heard;  and  whichever 
prison he has been sent to has there reformed the other prisoners; and as testified to by 
these  twenty-three  years  of  his  life  and  three  provincial  authorities  and  three  courts 
acquitting  him  and  a  hundred  thousand  of  his  students,  who  know  the  value  of  the 
Risale-i  Nur,  affirming  it  verbally  and  by  action,  despite  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
copies  of  it  being  distributed throughout  the  country,  the  Risale-i  Nur  has  produced 
only  benefits  and  caused  no  harm;  and  who  is  a  recluse,  single,  a  stranger,  elderly, 
poor, and sees himself at the door of the grave; and who with all his strength has given 
up transitory things, and has sought ways of atoning for his former sins and making his 
life eternal, and attaches not the slightest importance to worldly rank, and who, so that 
no harm will come to the  

                                             
39 See page 384, fn. 10. 
40 Before finally going there sometime in the final months of 1922, Bediuzzaman was on several 

occasions secretly summoned to Ankara by Mustafa Kemal during the Independence Struggle, in 
recognition of his effective struggle against the occupying forces. [Tr.] 

 

447

innocent and the elderly, out of his compassion does not curse those who torment and 
torture him; — those who say about such a man: “This old recluse disturbs the peace 
and  breaches  public  security;  his  aims  are  the  intrigues  of  this  world,  and  his 
correspondence  is  for  this  world,  in  which  case  he  is  guilty”  and  who  convict  him 
under  such  severe  conditions  are  surely  themselves  guilty  from  the  ground  to  the 
heavens, and they shall give their account at the Last Judgement! 

Can it be said about a man who with a speech induced eight mutinying regiments 
to  obey  their  officers,  and  with  a  single  article  persuaded  thousands  of  people  to 
support  him,  and  was  not  frightened  before  the  three  above-mentioned  formidable 
commanders, and did not fawn to them, and in courts of law declared: “If I had heads 
to  the  number  of  hairs  on  my  head  and  every  day  one  was  cut  off,  I  would  not 
surrender to atheism and misguidance  and betray my country and nation and Islam; I 
would not bow this head, which has been dedicated to the Qur’an, before tyrants,” and 
was concerned with no one in Emirdağ apart from five or ten brothers of the hereafter 
and  three  or  four  servants  —  could  it  be  said  about  such  a  man,  as  it  does  in  the 
indictment:  “This  Said  was  working  secretly  in  Emirdağ;  he  poisoned  the  minds  of 
some of the people giving them the idea of disturbing the peace; twenty men gathered 
round him and wrote private letters praising him, which shows that he was hatching a 
revolt  and was involved in covert politics against the government”? I refer it to your 
consciences  to  understand  just  how  far  from  right,  justice,  and  fairness  those  who 
torment him have deviated by, with unprecedented animosity and hatred, throwing him 
into prison for two years, in solitary confinement, and by not allowing him to speak in 
court. 

Is  it  at  all  possible  that  someone  who  has  received  public  attention  a  hundred 
times  greater  than  is  his  due,  and  brought  thousands  of  men  to  obedience  with  one 
speech,  and  induced  thousands  of  people  to  join  the  Ittihad-i  Muhammedî  Society 
with  one  newspaper  article,  and  made  fifty  thousand  people  listen  admiringly  to  his 
address in Aya Sophia Mosque41 — that such a man should work at it for three years 
in  Emirdağ  and  deceive  only  five  or  ten  people,  and  fill  his  grave,  which  he  is 
approaching, with unnecessary darkness rather than with light? Is it at all possible that 
he should do this? Satan himself could not make anyone accept it! 

The Fourth is their citing my not wearing the brimmed hat as an important reason 

for my conviction.42 They did not allow me to speak,  

                                             

41 These events occurred in early 1909. [Tr.] 
42 According to the famous Hat Act passed 25 November 1925, the wearing of European 

headgear became compulsory, and all other headgear was banned. [Tr.] 

 

448

otherwise I would have said this to those who were trying to punish me: I stayed as a 
guest for three months in the police station in Kastamonu. At no time did they say to 
me: “Wear the brimmed hat!” And although in three courts of law I did not wear the 
hat and did not remove my own headgear, they did not interfere with me. And on that 
pretext  for  twenty-three  years  a  number  of  irreligious  tyrants  have  inflicted  a  very 
distressing  and  severe  penalty  on  me  unofficially.  And  children,  women,  villagers, 
officials in their offices, and those who wear the beret are not compelled to wear the 
hat. And there is no physical benefit in wearing it. Yet because of their fabrications and 
allegations  a  recluse  like  myself  has  paid  a  twenty-year  penalty  for  not  wearing 
headgear that all the mujtahids and Shaykh al-Islams have prohibited. Those who are 
trying  to  have  me  punished  again  because  of  a  meaningless  custom  related  to  dress; 
and with such force, repetition, and insistence to have me found guilty because of my 
dress —despite, saying there is personal freedom, their comparing to themselves those 
who drink raki in public in Ramadan during the day and do not perform the obligatory 
prayers,  and  not  bothering  them—  surely  after  suffering  the  everlasting  extinction  of 
death and perpetual solitary confinement of the grave, at the Last Judgement they will 
be questioned concerning this error. 

The  Fifth:  Those  who  have  heard  this  third  indictment  and  seen  the  judgement 
that we published will confirm that on pretexts as flimsy as a fly’s wing, they are trying 
to confiscate some of the treatises of the Risale-i Nur, which is alluded to favourably 
by thirty-three Qur’anic verses, was applauded by such saints as Imam ‘Ali (May God 
exalt  him)  and  Gawth  al-A‘zam  (  May  his  mystery  be  sanctified),  is  affirmed  by  a 
hundred  thousand  believers,  and  in twenty years has won a highly beneficial rank for 
this nation and country without causing any harm. Even, making a pretext two pages 
about two correct explanations of two verses, which were written long ago and have 
been covered by pardons, it was even the cause of the four-hundred-page Zülfikâr and 
The  Miracles  of  Muhammad  (Mu’cizat-i  Ahmediye)  being  seized,  which  has 
strengthened  and  saved  the  belief  of  a  hundred  thousand  people  and  is  extremely 
beneficial and valuable. And now, giving the wrong meaning to one or two words out 
of  a  thousand,  they  are  trying  to  have that infinitely useful treatise seized.  As for us, 
we say:  

And for every calamity, we belong to God, and to Him is our return.43 * For 
us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs.44 

                                             

43 Qur’an, 2:156. 
44 Qur’an, 3:137. 

 

449

The Sixth: To those who deem me guilty of a crime because some of the Risale-i 
Nur students have seen the wondrous proofs of the Risale-i Nur and profited from its 
irrefutable teachings about belief, which are at the degree of ‘knowledge of certainty,’ 
and  as  encouragement,  congratulations,  appreciation,  and  gratitude,  praise  me 
excessively and have an over-favourable opinion of me, I say this: when a powerless, 
weak,  semi-literate,  lonely  exile  subject  to  derogatory  propaganda  designed  to  scare 
the people away from me, I found for myself some of the cures of the Qur’an and its 
sacred  truths  related  to  belief  which  were  a  perfect  remedy  for  my  ills.  Then 
concluding  that  they  were  also  just  the  medicine  for  this  nation  and  the  sons  of  this 
land,  I  wrote  down  those  valuable  truths.  Since  I  have  very  poor  handwriting  and  I 
was much in need of assistants, Divine favour sent me loyal and staunch helpers. 

If  I  had  completely  rejected  their  good  opinion  of  me  and  sincere  praise  and 
offended  them  by  rebuking  them  it  would  have  been  like  contempt  for  and  hostility 
towards  those  Lights  taken  from  the  treasury  of  the  Qur’an.  Thinking  too  it  would 
cause those diamond-penned stout-hearted assitants to leave me, I directed their praise 
and  applause  for my bankrupt person to the Risale-i Nur, a miracle of the Qur’an to 
which in truth the praise is due, and to the collective personality of its leading students. 
But  I  did  offend  them  in  a  way  by  saying  that  they  were  affording  me  a  share  a 
hundred  times  greater  than  my  due.  Could  any  law  impute  guilt  to  a  man  because 
others  praise  him  although  he  eschews  it  and  is  not  happy  at  it?  For this is what the 
officials are doing, who act in the name of the law. 

Although  it  was  written  on  page  fifty-four  of  the  court’s  judgement,  which  was 
written against us but which we published: “That great person of the end of time will 
be  a descendant  of the Prophet (PBUH), and we students of the Risale-i Nur can be 
considered to be members of the Prophet’s Family only in meaning. Also, there can be 
no  egotism  of any sort in the way of the Risale-i Nur, nor any wish for position and 
personal rank, or fame and renown. Even if I was offered high rank in the hereafter, I 
would  feel  myself  compelled  to  refuse  it  in  order  not  to  damage  the  sincerity  of the 
Risale-i  Nur;”  and  although  on  pages  twenty-two  and  three  it  is  written:  “Knowing 
one’s faults and realizing one’s poverty and impotence, and humbly seeking refuge at 
the Divine Court; with that personality I know myself to be more wretched, impotent, 
and faulty than everyone. So even if all the people praised and lauded me, they could 
not make me believe that I am someone good, of high spiritual and moral rank. Lest I 
frighten you off, I shall not say the many secret ills and bad characteristics of my third, 
true,  personality.  Out  of  His  grace,  Almighty  God  employs  this  personality  in  the 
mysteries of the Qur’an like a lowly  

 

450

private soldier. Endless thanks be to God. The soul is lower than everything, and the 
duty higher,” — although this is written in the Court judgement, they find me guilty of 
being  called  a  supreme  guide  due  to  the  praises  of  others,  which  in  fact  refer  to the 
Risale-i Nur, and are thus deserving of paying an awesome penalty due to the error. 

The Seventh: Although Denizli Court and Ankara Criminal Court and the Appeal 
Courts unanimously acquitted us and all the treatises of the Risale-i Nur and returned 
them and our letters to us, and they said “Even if the Appeal Court’s decision to quash 
the decision and Denizli’s acquittal were wrong, since they have been made final, the 
case cannot be retried,” I was sent to Emirdağ, where I spent three years as a recluse. 
There,  so  long  as  there  was  no  necessity,  I  spoke  only  with  the  two  or  three  tailor 
apprentices  who  were  assisting  me,  and  rarely,  for  five  or  ten  minutes  with  certain 
religiously-minded  people.  I  wrote no letters  other than once a week to one place as 
encouragement  in  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  wrote  only three letters in three  years to my 
Mufti  brother. I  gave  up  writing  pieces,  which  I  had  been  doing  for  twenty  to  thirty 
years, except for two points, twenty pages in length, which were useful for the people 
of  the  Qur’an  and  for  belief.  One  was  about  the  wisdom  in  the  repetitions  in  the 
Qur’an,  and  the  other,  about  the  angels;  I  wrote  no  other  treatise.  Only,  I  gave 
permission  for  the  treatises  which  the  courts  had  returned  to  be  made  into  large 
collections,  and  since  five  hundred  copies  of  The  Supreme  Sign,  which  had  been 
printed  in  the  old  letters,  had  been  handed  over  to  us  by  the  court,  and  since 
duplicating  machines  were  not  officially banned, I  gave permission to my brothers to 
duplicate  them  so  they  could  be  published for the benefit of the Islamic world, and I 
busied myself with correcting them. I was certainly not concerned with politics in any 
way.  Moreover,  although  official  permission  had  been  given  for  us  to  return  to  our 
native region, contrary to all the other exiles I accepted the hardship of exile in order 
not to become involved in politics and the world, and did not return. The treatment I 
have  received  these  last  twenty  months  proves  that  the  person  who  is  trying  in  this 
third indictment  to  find  guilty  such  a  man  through  the  baseless  accusations, lies,  and 
misinterpretations is ruled by two fearsome meanings, which I shall not utter for now. 
What  I  do  say  is  this:  the  grave  and  Hell  are  sufficient,  and  I  refer  it  to  the  Last 
Judgement. 

The Eighth: Since the Fifth Ray was returned to us after remaining for two years 
in  the  hands  of  Denizli  and  Ankara  Courts,  it  was  added  at  the  end  of  the  large 
collection  called  The  Illuminating  Lamp  together  with  my  defence,  which had led to 
our  acquittal  in  Denizli Court. For sure, previously we had held it to be confidential, 
but since the courts had  

 

451

advertised it and returned it after acquitting us, I permitted its duplication seeing that it 
was thus harmless. The original of the Fifth Ray was about allegorical Hadiths and was 
written thirty to forty years ago. For sure some Hadith scholars stated that some of the 
Hadiths  that  were  well-known  by  the  Umma  were  ‘dubious,’  but  since  it  was  their 
apparent meanings that had been objected to, the piece was written solely to save the 
believers  from  doubting  them.  Then  since  some  time  later  some  of  its  wondrous 
interpretations became clear for all to see, I held it to be confidential so that it should 
not  be  given  the  wrong  meaning.  Then  numerous  courts  studied  it  minutely,  and 
together with publicizing it, returned it to us. So I refer it to the consciences of those 
who  have  convicted  us  arbitrarily  to  see  just  how  far  it  is  from  justice,  right,  and 
fairness to now again find us guilty because of it. And saying, For us God suffices, and 
He is the Best Disposer of Affairs, I refer them to the Last Judgement. 

The  Ninth:  This  is  very  important,  but  since those  who have  convicted us have 

studied the Risale-i Nur, I have not written it so as not to upset them. 

The Tenth: This is powerful and important, but again so as not to offend them, I 

have not written it for now. 

                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i , 
                                               who is being held in absolute solitary confinement. 

* * * 

 [Part  of  a  petition  written  during  the  Eskişehir  trial  fifteen  years  ago  and 
sent to the Cabinet.]45 

You who “bind and loose”! 
I have suffered an injustice the like of which has rarely been seen in the world. To 
remain silent before such an injustice is disrespect for right. I am compelled therefore 
to divulge a most important fact. Demonstrate the fault I have committed so that the 
law demands either my execution or a hundred and one year’s imprisonment, or prove 
that  I am completely mad, or else give complete freedom to myself, my treatises, and 
my friends, and collect our losses from those who caused them. 

Yes, every government has a law and a principle according to which  

                                             

45 A petition was sent to the Cabinet fifteen years ago concerning this same matter. Now, since it 

has again arisen, I am obliged to send it again to the departments of government concerned. 

 

452

penalties are given. If there is nothing in the laws of the Government of the Republic 
to necessitate the heaviest penalty for myself and my friends, we should be given our 
complete freedom, as well as recompense and appreciation and an apology. For if my 
important service of the Qur’an, which is clear and open, is against the Government, I 
should  receive  not  a  year’s  sentence  in  this  way  and  a  number  of  my  friends,  six 
months  each,  I  should  be  given  the  death  sentence  or  a  hundred  and  one  year’s 
imprisonment  and  those  earnestly  attached  to  me  and  my  work  should  be  given  the 
heaviest penalties. But if our service is not against the Government, we should receive 
not  penalties,  charges  and  imprisonment,  but  appreciation  and  recompense.  For  it  is 
service  the  nature  of  which  may  be  understood  through  its  one  hundred  and  twenty 
treatises, and its challenging the great philosophers of Europe and overthrowing their 
principles.  Certainly,  such  effective  service  will  either  produce  ghastly  results  inside 
the country, or it will yield most advantageous, elevated, and scholarly fruits. In which 
case, I cannot be given a year’s sentence for playing a childish game of hoodwinking, 
and  deceiving  public  opinion,  and  concealing  the  intrigues  of  tyrants  and  their  lies 
about  us.  Those  like  me  either  receive  capital  punishment,  proudly  climbing  the 
gallows, or they remain free in the position of which they are worthy. 

Yes, a clever thief can steal diamonds worth thousands, so he would not sentence 
himself to the same penalty for stealing a fragment of glass worth virtually nothing. No 
thief would do that, indeed, no conscious creature. Such a thief is cunning, not utterly 
stupid in that way. 

Sirs!  According  to  your  delusions,  I  am  like  that  thief.  Rather  than  living  in 
seclusion in a poor village in one of the districts of Isparta for nine years and putting in 
danger  myself  and  my  treatises  which  are  the  aim  of  my  life  by  turning  against  the 
Government the ideas of five to ten ingenuous unfortunates, who have been given very 
light  sentences  along  with  me,  I  could  have  held  a  high  position  in  either  Ankara  or 
Istanbul  like  formerly  and  manipulated  thousands  of  people  towards  the  aim  I  was 
following.  Then  I  would  not  have  been  convicted  so  abjectly,  but  would  have  been 
involved in the world with the pride and dignity befitting my way and duty. 

I do not say this out of pride or to boast, but ashamedly, to point out the errors of 
those who, recalling some of my old self-advertisement and hypocrisy, want to abase 
me so that the position I hold lacks all importance and cannot be profited from. So I 
say to them: 

As someone who, as confirmed by his old defence, which was published under the 

name of The Testimony of Two Schools of Misfortune,  

 

453

reduced to obedience with a speech eight rebelling regiments during the Thirty-First of 
March  Incident;  and  as  was  reported  in  the  newspapers  of  the  time,  with  an  article 
called  The  Six  Steps  performed  the  important  service  of  turning  the  ideas  of  the 
Istanbul  ‘ulama  against  the  British  and  in  favour  of  the  National  Movement;  and 
delivered an address to thousands in Aya Sophia, making them listen to him; and was 
greeted  with  tumultuous  applause  by  the  Assembly  and  deputies  in  Ankara,  and  had 
one  hundred  and  sixty-three  deputies  assign  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  liras  for 
his  religious  school  and  university;  and  without quailing responded completely firmly 
to the angry President in the Speaker’s office and invited him to perform the obligatory 
prayers;  and  while  in  the  Darü’l-Hikmeti’l-Islamiye  was  unanimously  considered 
worthy by the Union and Progress Government of the duty  of effectively inviting the 
philosophers  of  Europe  to  accept  Islamic  wisdom;  and  Isharat  al-I‘jaz  (Signs  of 
Miraculousness),  the  work  he  wrote  on  the  front  during  the  War  and  has  now  been 
seized,  appeared  so  valuable  to  Enver  Pasha,  who  was  Commander-in-Chief  at  the 
time, that with respect shown by no one else and the idea of sharing in the good and 
glory of that memento of the War, which was racing to the future, he contributed the 
paper to have the work printed so that the exploits of its author during the War would 
be  remembered  —  such  a  man  would  not  descend  to  disgracing  the  dignity  of  his 
learning, the sacredness of his service, and his thousands of valuable friends by tainting 
himself  with  a  petty  crime  like  a  horse-thief,  abductor of  girls, or pickpocket so that 
you could sentence him to a year’s imprisonment and treat him like a stealer of goats 
or sheep. He would prefer execution to suffering under the arbitrary persecution of a 
malicious detective or common policeman the year’s sentence now given him together 
with being held under supervision for a year, after having been tormented for ten years 
without  reason  with  oppressive  surveillance  —  although  he  could  not  endure  to  be 
dominated by the Sultan. If such a man had been involved in the world and if he had 
harboured  such  a  wish  and  if  his  sacred  service  had  permitted,  he  would  have 
interfered in it to an extent ten times greater than the Menemen Affair and Shaykh Said 
Revolt.46  The  booming  sound  of  a  cannon  heard  by  all  the  world  would  not  have 
subsided to the buzz of a fly. 

Yes,  I  make  the  following  point  for  the  attention  of  the  Government  of  the 
Republic:  this  situation  has  been  brought  about  through  the  intrigues,  machinations 
and  propaganda  of  the  covert  organization  which  drove  me  to  this  misfortune.  The 
evidence  that  widespread  propaganda  and  terror  and  a  conspiracy  have  been 
orchestrated against us in a way never before  

                                             
46 See page 385, fns. 11, 12. 

 

454

seen in any event is this, that although I have a hundred thousand friends, not one of 
them has been able to write me any letter for six months, or to send any greetings, and 
the  fact  that  due  to  the  informing  of  plotters  who  are  trying  to  deceive  the 
Government,  interrogations  and  searches  have  been  continually  carried  out  from  the 
eastern provinces to those in the west. 

The  plan  these  intriguers  hatched  was  evidently  to  organize  an  ‘incident’  that 
would be the cause of thousands like me receiving the heaviest penalties. However, the 
result  was  a  penalty  that  recalled  an  incident  of  petty  pilfering  perpetrated  by  the 
commonest  person.  Of  one  hundred  and  fifteen  people,  fifteen  innocent  men  were 
given sentences of five or six months. Would any rational creature in the world prick 
the tail of a fierce lion or terrible dragon with his brilliantly sharp diamond sword, and 
make  it  turn  on  him?  If  his  intention  was  self-defence  or  combat,  he  would  use  his 
sword somewhere else. 

With  your  deluded  view,  you  conceive  of  me  as  such a man, for that is the way 
you  have  charged  me  and  sentenced  me.  If  I  act  in  a  manner  so  contrary  to 
consciousness  and  reason,  this  great  country  should  not  be  terrorized  and  public 
opinion turned against me with propaganda, I should be sent to a lunatic asylum like a 
common  madman.  But  if  I  am  someone  of  the  importance  you  afford  me,  my  keen 
sword would not be pointed at the tails of the lion or the dragon to make them attack 
him,  he  would  rather  defend  himself  as  far  as  he  could.  Just  as  I  have  voluntarily 
chosen  seclusion  these  last  ten  years,  and  tolerating  difficulties  beyond  human 
endurance, have interfered in no way whatsoever in matters of government, nor have I 
wanted to interfere. Because my sacred duty prohibits me. 

O you who bind and loose! Is it at all possible that in the one hundred and twenty 
treatises  of  a  person  who,  as  was  written  in  the  newspapers  twenty-five  years  ago, 
with one newspaper article caused thirty thousand people to accept his ideas, and drew 
the attention of the huge ‘Operation Army’ on himself, and replied with six words to 
the  questions  of  the  chief  cleric  of  the  English,  who  wanted six hundred, and  gave a 
speech  after  the  Constitutional  Revolution  as  though  he  was  a  leading  diplomat,  — 
would only fifteen words related to politics and the world be found in the one hundred 
and  twenty  treatises  of  such  a  man?  Is  it  at  all  reasonable  to  accept  that  this  man 
follows  politics  and  his  aim  is  this  world  and  he  is  troubling  the  Government?  If  his 
mind was set on meddling in politics and the Government, such a person would have 
made  it  clear  in  a  single  of  his  treatises,  and  indicated  it  in  a  thousand  places.  If  his 
purpose had been criticism with political intent, would he not have found anything to  

 

455

criticize  other  than  one  or  two  rules  about  the  veiling  of  women  and  inheritance, 

which have long been in force? 

Yes,  the  politically-minded  opponent  of  a  ruling  regime  which  had  enacted  far-
reaching reforms would have found not those one or two to object to but thousands. 
As  though  the  reforms  of  the  Government  of  the  Republic  consisted  only  of  one  or 
two minor matters. Although I had no intention to criticize it whatsoever, because of 
one or two words in one or two of my books which I had written long previously, it 
was  said:  “He  is  attacking  the  ruling  regime  and  its  reforms.”  So  I  ask:  Should  the 
whole  country  be  busied  with  a  scholarly  matter  which  demands  not  the  smallest 
penalty, in a way to cause anxiety? 

Thus,  myself  and  five  to  ten  of  my  friends  being  given  the  most  minor,  trivial 
sentences; and the whole country being intimidated by powerful propaganda against us 
and  being  made  to  hate  us;  and  Sükrü  Kaya,  the  Interior  Minister,  being  called  to 
Isparta  with  a  significant  force  of  soldiers  in  order to perform a task a single private 
soldier could perform, that is, to arrest me; and Ismet, the head of the Cabinet, going 
to  the  eastern  provinces  in  that  connection;  and  for  two  months  in  prison  my  being 
prohibited  from  speaking  with  anyone;  and  no  one  asking  after  me  or  sending  me 
greetings while alone in this exile; — all these show that it is a meaningless, pointless, 
illegal  situation  like  a  tree  as huge  as a mountain producing a  fruit the size of a pea. 
Seeing  that  ‘government’  means  ‘to  govern  with  wisdom,’  it  is  not  something  any 
government would be involved in, especially a legal government like the Government 
of the Republic, which adheres more closely to the law than any other. 

I  want  my  rights  within the bounds of the law. I accuse of being criminals those 
who  act  against  the  law  in  the  name  of  the  law.  The  laws  of  the  Government  of the 
Republic  certainly  reject  the  arbitrary  acts  of  such  criminals.  I  am  hopeful  that  my 
rights will be restored to me. 

                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i 

 

456

An Example of the Risale-i Nur’s Veracity 

N O T E 

As  the  fair-minded  and enlightened who read the following treatise,47 which was 
written  nineteen  years  ago,  will  clearly  understand,  the  Risale-i  Nur,  with  all  its  one 
hundred  and  thirty  parts,  is  concerned  only  with  belief  and  the  hereafter  and  was 
written  in  that  spirit,  completely  free  of  all  political  and  worldly  motives.  This  clear 
and  definite  fact  was  corroborated  by  the  lengthy  investigations  and  minute  studies 
carried out by the Courts of Eskişehir, Isparta, Denizli, and Afyon. In this connection, 
we are requesting your concern and assistance in having all our books returned to us, 
which  for  more  than  twenty  months  have  been  held  by  Afyon  Court,  and  not  the 
smallest point of which was shown by the Appeal Court as constituting an offence, and 
which  have  saved  the  belief  of  thousands  of  people,  and  have  been  praised  and 
applauded by their readers, and scholars, and the Islamic world. 

The greater part of the books held by Afyon Court were collected by the first of 
our companions to be released. Saying: “We gave these books of ours to Ustad, their 
owner;  they  should  be  handed  over  to  him,”  they  referred  them  to  me.  In particular, 
they  left  in  the  court  the  gilded  Qur’an  which  was  written  showing  the  miraculous 
‘coincidences’ of letters,48 which was among the confiscated books. Before everything 
we await the swift return to us of those books and our Qur’an, which were previously 
returned to us by Denizli and Ankara Courts. 

                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i  

                                             

47 The Sixteenth Letter was written several years previously to Eskishehir and Denizli Courts, 

yet its rebuffing all the points of objection as though it had seen the three courts demonstrates clearly 
that it was the object of Divine bestowal and grace. 

48 Tevafuk: See page 407, fn. 20. 

 

457

The Sixteenth Letter 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Men said to them: “A great army is gathering against you,” and frightened 
them.  But  it  [only]  increased  their  belief;  they  said:  “For  us  God  suffices, 
and He is the best Disposer of Affairs.”49 

This  letter  manifested  the  meaning  of  the  verse,  But  speak  to  him  mildly,50  and 
was not written vehemently. It is the answer to a question asked me both explicitly and 
implicitly by many people. 

[To  reply  is  not  agreeable  to  me  and  I  do  not  want  to,  for  I  have  bound 
everything  to  reliance  on  God.  But  since  I  have  not  been  left  in  peace  to 
myself  in  my own world and since they have directed my attention towards 
the  world,  I  am  compelled  to  propound  five  ‘Points’  in the language of the 
Old  Said  in  order  to  explain  the  reality  of  the situation both to my friends, 
and to ‘the worldly,’ and to those in authority, so as to save not myself, but 
my  friends  and  my  Words,  from  the  suspicions  and  ill-treatment  of  ‘the 
worldly.’] 

FIRST POINT 

with them?” 

It is asked: “Why have you withdrawn from politics and now have nothing to do 

T h e  A n s w e r : The Old Said of nine or ten years ago was involved in politics 
a  certain  amount;  indeed,  thinking  he  would  serve  religion  and  learning  by  means  of 
politics,  he  was  wearied  for  nothing.  He  saw  that  it  is  a  dangerous  way  which  is 
doubtful and full of difficulties and for me superfluous, as well as forming an obstacle 
to the most necessary duties.  

                                             

49 Qur’an, 3:173. 
50 Qur’an, 20:44. 

 

458

It is mostly lies and there is the possibility of unknowingly being a tool in the hand of 
Europe.  Furthermore,  one  who  enters politics is either successful or is in opposition. 
As for being successful, since I am neither an official nor a deputy, to work in politics 
is  unnecessary  and  nonsense  for  me.  Politics  has  no  need  for  me  so  that  I  should 
interfere for nothing. If I join the opposition, I would do so either with ideas or with 
force. If  it was with ideas there is no need for me, for the questions are all clear, and 
everyone knows them as I do. To wag one’s chin pointlessly is meaningless. If I join 
the opposition with the use of force in view and to provoke an incident, there would 
be  the  possibility  of  committing  thousands  of  sins  in  order  to  reach  a  doubtful  goal. 
Many  people  would  be  afflicted  by  disaster  on  account  of  one.  So  saying  that  in 
conscience  he  could  not  accept  committing  sins  and  causing  the  innocent  to commit 
sins  due  to  a  one  or  two  in  ten  possibility,  the  Old  Said  gave  up  cigarettes  together 
with  the  newspapers,  politics,  and  worldly  conversation  about  politics.  Decisive 
evidence  for  this  is  the  fact  that  for  the  past  eight  years  I  have  not  read  a  single 
newspaper  nor  listened to one being read. Let someone come forward and say that I 
have read one or listened to  one. Whereas eight  years ago the Old Said used to read 
perhaps eight newspapers  every day. Furthermore, for the past five years I have been 
under the closest scrutiny and surveillance. Anyone who has observed the slightest hint 
of  political  activity  should  say  so. But for someone like me who is nervous, fearless, 
and without attachment, who considers the best stratagem to be without stratagem, his 
ideas  will  not  remain  secret  for  eight  days,  let  alone  eight  years.  If  he  had  had  the 
appetite and desire for politics, he would not have left any necessity for investigation 
and scrutiny, he would have given voice like the firing of a cannon. 

SECOND POINT 

Why does the New Said avoid politics with such vehemence? 
T h e  A n s w e r :  He avoids it so vehemently in order to serve belief and the 
Qur’an, which is of the greatest importance, the greatest necessity and is the most pure 
and  most  right,  in  order  not  to  sacrifice  unnecessarily  and  officiously for one or two 
doubtful  years  of  worldly  life  the  working  for  and  gaining  of  more  than  millions  of 
years of eternal life. For he says: I am getting old and I do not know how many more 
years  I shall live, so the most important question for me must be to work for eternal 
life.  The  prime  means  of  gaining  eternal  life  and  the  key  to  everlasting  happiness  is 
belief,  so  one  has  to  work  for  that.  But  since  I  am  obliged  by  the  Shari‘a  to  serve 
people  in  respect  of  learning  so  that  they  may  profit  also,  I  want  to  perform  such  a 
duty. However, such service will either concern  

 

459

social and worldly life, which I cannot do, and also in stormy times it is not possible to 
perform such service soundly. Therefore, I left aside that aspect and chose the aspect 
of service to belief, which is the most important, the most necessary, and the soundest. 
I  leave  that  door  open  so  that  the  truths  of  belief  I  have  gained  for  myself  and  the 
spiritual  remedies  I  have  myself  experienced  may  be  acquired  by  others.  Perhaps 
Almighty God will accept this service and make it atonement for my former sins. Apart 
from  Satan  the  Accursed,  no  one,  be  it  a  believer  or  an  unbeliever,  one  of  the 
veracious  or  an  atheist,  has  the  right  to  oppose  this  work.  For  unbelief  resembles 
nothing  else.  In  tyrannizing,  vice,  and  grievous  sins  there  may  be  an  inauspicious 
satanic pleasure, but in unbelief there is no sort of pleasure at all. It is pain upon pain, 
darkness upon darkness, torment upon torment. 

Just how contrary to reason it would be for someone like me who is unattached, 
alone, and compelled to atone for his former sins to leave aside working for an endless 
eternal life and serving a sacred light like belief, and to cast himself in old age into the 
unnecessary,  perilous  games  of  politics—just  how  contrary  to  wisdom,  just  what  a 
lunacy it would be even lunatics would understand! 

But  if  you  ask  why  service  of  the  Qur’an  and  belief  prohibit  me,  I  would  say: 
Since the truths of  belief and the Qur’an are each like diamonds, if I was polluted by 
politics,  the  ordinary  people  who  are  easily  deceived,  would  wonder  about  those 
diamonds  I  was  holding,  “Aren’t  they  for  political  propaganda  to  attract  more 
supporters?” They might regard the diamonds as bits of common glass. Then by being 
involved with politics, I would be wronging the diamonds and as though reducing their 
value. O you whose view is restricted to this world! Why do you struggle against me? 
Why do you not leave me to myself? 

If you say: The shaykhs sometimes interfere in our business, and they sometimes 

call you a shaykh. 

I reply: Good sirs! I am not a shaykh, I am a hoja [teacher]. The evidence is this: 
I have been here four years and if I had taught a single person the sufi way, you would 
have  had  the  right  to  be  suspicious.  But  I  have  told  everyone  who  has  come  to  me: 
Belief is necessary, Islam is necessary; this is not the age of sufism. 

If you say: They call you Said-i Kurdi; perhaps you have some nationalist ideas, 

and that doesn’t suit our interests. 

I would reply: Sirs! The things the Old Said and the New Said have written are 

clear. I cite as testimony the certain statement, “Islam has  

 

460

abrogated the tribalism of the Age of Ignorance.” For years I have considered negative 
nationalism  and  racialism  to  be  fatal  poison,  since  they  are  a  variety  of  European 
disease.  And  Europe  has  infected  Islam  with  them  thinking  it  would  cause  division, 
and Islam would break up and be easily swallowed. My students and those who have 
had anything to do with me know that for years I have tried to treat that disease. Since 
it  is  thus,  good  sirs,  I  wonder  why  you  make  every  incident  a  pretext  to  harass  me? 
According  to  what  principle  do you  cause  me  distress  at every worldly incident, like 
punishing and inflicting trouble on a soldier in the west because of a mistake made by a 
soldier  in  the  east  due  to  the  connection  of  the  army,  or  convicting  a  shopkeeper  in 
Baghdad because of a crime committed by a tradesman in Istanbul due to their being in 
the  same  line  of  business?  How  can  the  conscience  demand  this?  What  benefit  can 
require it? 

THIRD POINT 

My  friends  who  wonder  how  I  am  and  are  astonished  at  my  meeting  every 
calamity  silently  with  patience  ask the  following  question:  “How  can  you  endure the 
difficulties  and  troubles  with  which  you  are  faced,  whereas  formerly  you  were  very 
proud and angry and could not endure even the least insult?” 

T h e  A n s w e r : Listen to two short incidents and stories and you shall receive 

your answer: 

The First Story: Two years ago an official spoke insultingly and contemptuously 
about  me  behind  my  back.  They  later  told  me  about  it.  For  about  an  hour  I  was 
affected  due  to  the  Old  Said’s  vein  of  temperament.  Then  through  Almighty  God’s 
mercy the following fact occurred to me; it dispelled the distress and made me forgive 
the man. The fact is this: 

I  addressed  my  soul  saying:  if his insults and the faults he described concern my 
person and my soul, may God be pleased with him, because he recounted the faults of 
my soul. If he spoke the truth, he drove me to train my soul and he helped in saving 
me from arrogance. If he spoke falsely, he has helped to save me from hypocrisy and 
undeserved  fame,  the  source  of  hypocrisy.  No,  I  have  not  been  reconciled  with  my 
soul, for I have not trained it. If someone tells me there is a scorpion on my neck or 
breast or else points it out to me, I should be grateful to him, not offended. But if the 
man’s insults were directed towards my belief and my attribute of being servant of the 
Qur’an, it does not concern me. I refer him to the Qur’an’s Owner, Who employs me. 
He is Mighty, He is Wise. And if it was merely to curse at me, insult me, and destroy 
my character, that does not concern me either. For I am an exile, a prisoner, a  

 

461

stranger, and my hands are tied, and it does not fall to me to try to restore my honour 
myself. It rather concerns the authorities of this village where I am a guest and under 
surveillance,  then  of  the  district,  then  of  the  province.  Insulting  the  prisoner  of  a 
person, concerns the person; he defends the prisoner. Since the reality of the matter is 
this, my heart became easy. I said, 

My  [own]  affair  I  commit  to  God;  for  God  [ever]  watches  over  His 
servants.51 

I  thought  of  the  incident  as  not  having  happened.  But  unfortunately  it  was  later 
understood that the Qur’an had not forgiven him... 

The  Second  Story:  This  year  I  heard  that  an incident had occurred.  Although I 
only  heard  a  brief  account  of  it  after  it  had  happened,  I  was  treated  as though I had 
been closely connected with it. Anyway I do not correspond with anyone, and if I do, I 
only  write  extremely  rarely  concerning  some  question  of  belief  to  a  friend.  In  fact  I 
have  written  only  one  letter  to  my  brother  in  four years. Both I prevent myself from 
mixing with others, and ‘the worldly’ prevent me. I have only been able to meet with 
one or two close friends once or twice a week. As for visitors to the village, once or 
twice  a  month  perhaps  one  or  two  used  to  meet  with  me  for  one  or  two  minutes 
concerning  some matter  to  do  with  the  hereafter.  In  exile,  a stranger, alone, with no 
one,  I  was  barred  from  everything,  from  everyone,  in  a  village  which  was unsuitable 
for  someone  like  me  to  work  for  a  livelihood.  Even,  four  years  ago  I  repaired  a 
tumble-down mosque. Although with the certificate I had from my own region to act 
an imam and preacher I acted as imam in the mosque for four years (May God accept 
it), this past Ramadan I could not go to the mosque. Sometimes I performed the five 
daily  prayers  alone.  I  was  deprived  of  the  twenty-fivefold  merit  and  good  of 
performing the prayers in congregation. 

I  displayed  the  same  patience  and  forbearance in  the  face  of  these two incidents 
that befell me as I did towards the treatment of that official two years ago. God willing 
I  shall  continue  to  do  so.  I  think  like  this  and  say:  if  this  ill-treatment,  distress,  and 
oppression inflicted on me by ‘the worldly’ is for my faulty soul, I forgive it. Perhaps 
my soul will be reformed by means of it, and perhaps it will be atonement for its sins. I 
have  experienced  many  of  the  good  things  in  this  guest-house  of  the  world;  if  I 
experience  a  little  of  its  trials,  I  shall  still  offer  thanks.  If  ‘the  worldly’  oppress  me 
because of my service of belief and the Qur’an, it is not up to me to defend it. I refer it 
to the Mighty and Compelling One. If  

                                             

51 Qur’an, 40:44. 

 

462

the  intention  is  to  destroy  the  regard  in  which  I  am  held  generally,  to  expunge 
undeserved  fame,  which  is  baseless and causes hypocrisy and destroys sincerity, then 
may  God  bless  them!  For  I  consider  being  held  in  regard  by  people  generally  and 
gaining  a  name  among  them  to  be  harmful  for  people  like  me.  Those  who  have 
dealings with me know that I do not want respect to be shown to me, indeed, I can’t 
abide it. I have even scolded a valuable friend of mine perhaps fifty times for showing 
me excessive respect. If their intention in slandering me, belittling me in the eyes of the 
people,  and  defaming  me  is  directed  towards  the  truths  of  belief  and  the  Qur’an  of 
which I am the interpreter, it is pointless. For a veil cannot be drawn over the stars of 
the Qur’an. “One who closes his eyes only himself does  not see; he does not make it 
night for anyone else.” 

FOURTH POINT 

The answer to a number of suspicious questions: 
T h e  F i r s t : ‘The worldly’ say to me: “How do you live? What do you live on 
since you do not work? We don’t want people in our country who sit around idly and 
live off the labour of others.” 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  I  live  through  frugality  and  the  resulting  plenty.  I  am  not 
obliged to anyone other the One Who provides for me and I have taken the decision 
not to become obliged to anyone else. Yes, someone who lives on a hundred para, or 
even  forty  para,  does  not  become  obliged  to  anyone.  I  do  not  want  to  explain  this 
matter. To do so is most disagreeable to me, as it may make me feel a sort of pride or 
egotism. But since ‘the worldly’ ask about it suspiciously, I reply as follows: since my 
childhood, throughout my life, it has been a principle of my life not to accept anything 
from the people, even zakat, not to accept a salary —only I was compelled to accept 
one  for  one  or  two  years  in  the  Darü’l-Hikmeti’l-Islamiye  on  the  insistence  of  my 
friends— and not to become obliged to people for a worldly livelihood. The people of 
my  native  region  and  those  who  have  known  me  in  other  places  know  this.  During 
these  five  years  of  exile,  many  friends  have  tried  earnestly  to  make  me  accept  their 
gifts, but I have accepted none of them. If, therefore, it is asked me, “So how do you 
manage  to  live?”,  I reply: I live  through Divine bestowal and blessings. For sure, my 
soul  deserves  all  insults  and  contempt,  but  as  a  wonder  resulting from service of the 
Qur’an,  I  receive  plenty  and  blessings  which  are  a  Divine  bestowal  in  the  matter  of 
sustenance. In accordance with the verse,  

But the bounty of your Sustainer rehearse and proclaim,52 

                                             

52 Qur’an, 93:11. 

 

463

I  shall  recall  the  bounties  Almighty  God  has  bestowed  on  me,  and  mention  a  few 
examples by way of thanks. But together with being thanks, I am frightened that it will 
induce  hypocrisy  and  pride  so  that  blessed  plenty  will  be  cut.  For  to  make  known  a 
secret  Divine  gift  of  plenty causes it to cease. But what can I do, I am compelled to 
tell them. 

The  First:  This  six  months  one  bushel  (kile)53  of  wheat,  consisting  of  thirty-six 
loaves of bread, has sufficed me. There is still some left, it is not finished. How much 
longer54 it will last, I do not know.  

The  Second:  This  blessed  month  of  Ramadan  I  received  food  from  only  two 
houses, and both of them made me ill. I understood that I am  prohibited from eating 
the  food  of  others.  The  rest  of  the  time,  in  the  whole  of  Ramadan,  three  loaves  of 
bread  and  one  okka55  of  rice  sufficed  me,  as  was  witnessed  and  told  by  Abdullah 
Çavus, the owner of a blessed house and a loyal friend who saw my economizing. The 
rice even was finished two weeks after the end of Ramadan.  

The Third: For three months on the mountain one kiyye56 of butter was enough 
for me and my guests, eating it every day together with bread. On one occasion even I 
had a blessed  visitor called Süleyman. Both his bread and my bread were about to be 
finished.  It  was  Wednesday.  I  told  him  to  go  and  get  some  bread.  For  two  hours’ 
distance  on  every  side  of  us  there  was  no  one  from  whom  he  could  have  got  any 
bread. He said that he wanted to stay with me on the mountain on Thursday night so 
that we could pray together. Saying, Our reliance is on God, I told him to stay. Later, 
although it had no connection with this and there was no reason for it, we both began 
walking till we reached the top of the mountain. There was a little water in the ewer, 
and we had a small piece of sugar and some tea. I said to him: “Brother! Make some 
tea!”  He  set  about  making  it  and  I  sat  down  under  a  cedar-tree  overlooking  a  deep 
ravine. I thought regretfully to myself: we have a bit of mouldy bread which will only 
just be enough for us this evening. What shall we do for two days and what shall I say 
to  this  ingenuous  man?  While  thinking  this,  I  suddenly  turned  my  head  involuntarily 
and I saw a huge loaf of bread on the cedar-tree in among the branches; it was facing 
us.  I  exclaimed:  “Süleyman!  Good  news!  Almighty  God  has  sent  us  food.”  We took 
the  bread,  and  looking  at  it  saw  that  no  bird  or  wild  animal  had  touched  it.  And  for 
twenty or thirty days no one at all had climbed to the top of that mountain. The bread 
was sufficient for us for the two days. While we  

                                             

53 36.5 lbs. [Tr.] 
54 It lasted a year. 
55 About 2.8 lbs. or 1,300 grammes.  [Tr.] 
56 About 2.8 lbs. [Tr.] 

 

464

were  eating  and  it  was  about  to  be  finished,  righteous  Süleyman  who  had  been  the 
most  loyal  of  loyal  friends  for  four  years,  suddenly  appeared  from  below  with  more 
bread. 

The  Fourth:  I  bought  this  sack  coat  that  I’m  wearing  seven  years  ago  second-
hand.  In  five  years  I  have  spent  only  four  and  a  half  liras  on  clothes,  underwear, 
slippers,  and  stockings.  Frugality  and  Divine  mercy  and  the  resulting  plenty  have 
sufficed me. 

Thus, there are numerous things like these examples and numerous sorts of Divine 
blessings.  The  people  of  this  village  know  most  of  them.  But  do  not  suppose  I  am 
mentioning  them  out  of  pride,  I  have  been  forced  to,  rather.  And  do  not  think  they 
were  due  to  my  goodness.  These  instances  of  plenty  were  either  bestowal  to  the 
sincere  friends  who  have  visited  me,  or  a  bestowal  on  account  of  service  to  the 
Qur’an,  or  an  abundance  and  benefit  resulting  from  frugality,  or  they  have  been 
sustenance  for  the  four  cats  I  have  which  recite  the  Divine  Names  “O  Most 
Compassionate  One!  O  Most  Compassionate  One!”,  which  comes  in  the  form  of 
plenty and from which I benefit too. 

Yes, if you listen carefully to their mournful miaowings, you will understand that 
they  are  saying,  “Ya  Rahim!  Ya  Rahim!  O  Most  Compassionate  One!    O  Most 
Compassionate  One!”  We  have  arrived  at  the  subject  of  cats  and  it  has  recalled  the 
hen. I have a hen. This winter every day almost without exception she brought me an 
egg  from  the  treasury  of  Mercy.  Then  one  day  she  brought  me  two  eggs  and  I  was 
astonished. I asked my friends “How can this be?” They replied: “Perhaps it is a Divine 
gift.”  The  hen  also  has  a young chick she hatched in the summer. It started to lay at 
the beginning of Ramadan and continued for forty days. Neither I nor those who assist 
me have any doubt that, being both young, and in winter, and in Ramadan, this blessed 
situation was a Divine gift and bestowal. And whenever the mother stopped laying, it 
immediately started, not leaving me without eggs. 

S e c o n d  S u s p i c i o u s  Q u e s t i o n :  ‘The worldly’ ask: How can we be 
confident  that  you  will  not  interfere  in  our  world? If we leave you free, perhaps you 
may interfere in it. Also, how do we know that you are not being cunning? How do we 
know that it is not a stratagem, showing yourself to have abandoned the world and not 
taking things from the people openly, but secretly? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  My  attitude  and  situation  in  the  Court  Martial  and  in  the 
period before the proclamation of the Constitution, which are known by many, and my 
defence  in  the  Court  Martial  at  that  time  called  The  Testimony  of  Two  Schools  of 
Misfortune, show decisively that the  

 

465

life I lived was such that I would not resort to the tiniest wiles, let alone cunning and 
subterfuge.  If  trickery  had  been  resorted  to  in  this  last  five  years,  application  would 
have been made to you in sycophantic manner. A wilely man tries to ingratiate himself. 
He does not hold back; he always tries to deceive and hoodwink. Whereas I have not 
condescended  to  lower  myself  by  responding  to  the  severest  attacks  and  criticisms 
levelled  at  me.  Saying,  I  place  my  trust  in  God,  I  turned  my  back  on  ‘the  worldly.’ 
Moreover, one who discovers the reality of this world and knows the hereafter, is not 
sorry  if  he  is  sensible;  he does not turn back to the world and struggle with it again. 
Someone after the age of fifty who has no connection with anything and is alone, will 
not  sacrifice  eternal  life  for  one  or  two  years  of  the  chatter  and  deception  of  this 
world. If he does so, he is not cunning, but foolish and crazy. What can a crazy lunatic 
do  so  that  anyone  should  bother  with  him?  As  for  the  suspicion  of  outwardly 
abandoning the world while inwardly seeking it, in accordance with the verse, 

Nor  do  I  absolve  my  own  self  [of  blame];  the  [human]  soul  is  certainly 
prone to evil,57 

I do not exonerate my soul, for it wants everything bad. But in this fleeting world, 
this  temporary  guest-house,  during  old  age,  in  a  brief  life,  it  is  not  reasonable  to 
destroy eternal, everlasting life and eternal happiness for a little bit of pleasure. Since it 
is not profitable for the reasonable and the aware, my soul has willy-nilly had to follow 
my reason. 

T h e  T h i r d  S u s p i c i o u s  Q u e s t i o n : ‘The worldly’ say: Do you like 
us?  Do  you  approve  of  us?  If  you  do  like  us,  why  are  you  stand-offish  and  have 
nothing to do with us? If you do not like us, that means you object to us, and we crush 
those who object to us. 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  Not  you,  if  I  had  loved  your  world,  I  would  not  have 
withdrawn  from  it.  I  don’t  like either you or your world. But I do not interfere with 
them. For I have different goals, different points have filled my heart; they have left no 
place in my heart to think of other things. Your duty is to look to the hand, not to the 
heart. For you seek your government and your public order. So long as the hand does 
not interfere, what right do you have to interfere in the heart and say, “the heart should 
love us too,” although you are  in  no way worthy of it? Yes, just as I desire and long 
for the spring during this winter, but I cannot will it nor attempt to bring it, so I long 
for the world to be righted and I pray for it and I want the worldly to be reformed, but 
I cannot will these  

                                             

57 Qur’an, 12:53. 

 

466

things,  because  I  do  not have the power. I cannot attempt  them in fact, because it is 
neither my duty, nor do I have the capacity. 

F  o  u  r  t  h    S  u  s  p  i  c  i  o  u  s    Q  u  e  s  t  i  o  n  :    ‘The worldly’  say:  we  have 
experienced so many calamities, we no longer have confidence in anyone. How can we 
be certain that given the opportunity you won’t interfere as you wish? 

T h e  A n s w e r :  The previous points should give you confidence. In addition, 
since  I  did  not  interfere  in  your  world  while  in  my  native  region  among my students 
and relatives, in the midst of those who heeded me and of exciting events, for someone 
who  is  alone  in  exile,  with  no  one,  a  stranger,  weak,  powerless,  turned  with  all  his 
strength  towards  the  hereafter,  cut  off  from  all  social  relations  and  correspondence, 
who has only found a few friends from far afield who are also turned to the hereafter, 
and who is a stranger to everyone else and whom everyone else regards as a stranger 
— for such a person to interfere in your fruitless and dangerous world would surely be 
a compounded lunacy. 

FIFTH POINT 

This concerns five small matters. 
T  h  e    F  i  r  s  t  :    ‘The  worldly’  ask  me:  Why  do  you  yourself  not  practise  the 
principles  of  our  civilization, our style of life,  and  our manner of dressing? Does this 
mean you oppose us? 

M y  r e p l y :  Sirs! What right do you have to propose to me the principles of 
your civilization? For as though casting me outside the laws of civilization, you have 
wrongfully  forced  me  to  reside  in  a  village  for  five  years  prohibited  from  all  social 
relations  and  correspondence.  While  you  left  all  the  exiles  in  the  town  with  their 
friends  and  relations,  then  gave  them  the  papers  granting  them  an  amnesty,  without 
reason  you  isolated  me  and  did  not  allow  me  to  meet  with  anyone  from  my  native 
region with one or two exceptions. That means you do not count me as a member of 
this nation and a citizen. How can you propose to me that I apply your civil code to 
myself?  You  have  made  the  world  into  a  prison  for  me.  Such  things  cannot  be 
proposed to someone in prison. You closed the door of the world on me, so I knocked 
on the door of the hereafter, and Divine mercy opened it to me. How can the confused 
customs  and  principles  of  the  world  be  proposed  to  someone  at  the  door  of  the 
hereafter? Whenever you set me free and return me to my native region and restore my 
rights, then you can require me to conform to your principles. 

S e c o n d  M a t t e r  : ‘The worldly’ say: “We have an official department for 

instructing in the precepts of religion and truths of Islam.  

 

467

With what authority do you publish religious works? Being a convicted exile, you have 
no right to mix in these matters.” 

T h e  A n s w e r :  Truth and reality cannot be restricted. How can belief and the 
Qur’an  be  restricted?  You can restrict the principles and laws of your world, but the 
truths  of  belief  and  Qur’anic  principles  cannot  be  forced  into  the  form  of  worldly 
dealings, be given an official guise and offered in return for a wage. Those mysteries 
which  are  Divine  gifts,  those  blessings,  come  rather  through  a  sincere  intention  and 
giving up the world and carnal pleasures. Moreover, that official department of yours 
accepted  me  and  appointed  me  as  a  preacher  while  I  was  in  my  home  region.  I 
accepted the position, but rejected the salary. I have the document in my possession. 
With the document I can act as an imam and preacher everywhere, because my being 
exiled was unjust. Also, since the exiles have been returned, my old documents are still 
valid. 

Secondly: I addressed the truths of belief which I have written directly to my own 
soul.  I  do  not  invite  everyone.  Rather,  those  whose  spirits  are  needy  and  hearts 
wounded search out and find those Qur’anic remedies. Only, to secure my livelihood I 
had printed a treatise of mine about the resurrection of the dead before the new script 
was introduced. And the former governor, who was unfair to me, studied the treatise, 
but did nothing against it since he could find nothing in it to criticize. 

T  h  i  r  d    M  a  t  t  e  r  :  Some  of  my  friends  remain  apparently  aloof  from  me 
because ‘the worldly’ consider me with suspicion and in order to appear favourable to 
‘the  worldly,’  indeed,  they  criticize  me.  But  the  cunning  ‘worldly’  attribute  their 
aloofness  and  avoiding  me  not  to  their  loyalty  to  ‘the  worldly’  but  to  a  sort  of 
hypocrisy and lack of conscience, and they look on those friends of mine coldly. 

So  I  say  this:  O  my  friends  of  the  hereafter!  Don’t  stand  aloof  from  my being a 
servant of the Qur’an and run away. Because, God willing, no harm will come to you 
from me. Suppose some calamity is visited on you or I am oppressed, you cannot be 
saved  by  avoiding  me.  By  doing  that  you  will  make  yourselves  more  deserving  of 
calamity and a blow. What is there, that you should have these groundless fears? 

F o  u r t h  M a t t e r :  I see during this time of my exile that certain boastful 
people who have fallen into the swamp of politics regard me in a partisan manner, with 
rivalry, as though I am connected with the worldly currents like they are. 

Sirs! I am in the current of belief. Before me is the current of unbelief. I have no 
connection  with  other  currents.  Perhaps  some  of  those  who  work  for  a  wage  see 
themselves as excused to a degree. But to take up a  

 

468

position  opposed  to  me  in  rivalry  for  no  wage  in  the  name  of  patriotism,  and  harass 
me,  and  oppress  me,  is  a  truly  grievous  error.  For  as  was  proved  above,  I  have  no 
connection at all with world politics. I have dedicated and vowed all my time and my 
life to the truths of belief and the Qur’an. Since it is thus, let the one who torments and 
harasses  me  in  rivalry  think  that  such  treatment  of  his  is  similar  to  causing  harm  to 
belief in the name of atheism and unbelief. 

F i f t h  M a t t  e r :  Since this world is transitory, and since life is short, and 
since the truly essential duties are many, and since eternal life will be gained here, and 
since the world is not without an owner, and since this guest-house of the world has a 
most Wise and Generous director, and since neither good nor bad will remain without 
recompense, and since according to the verse,  

On no soul does God place a burden greater than it can bear58 

there is no obligation that cannot be borne, and since a safe way is preferable to a 
harmful  way,  and  since  worldly  friends  and  ranks last only till the door of the grave, 
then surely the most fortunate is  he who does not forget the hereafter for this world, 
and does not sacrifice the hereafter for this world, and does not destroy the life of the 
hereafter  for  worldly  life,  and  does  not  waste  his  life  on  trivial  things,  but  considers 
himself to be a guest and acts in accordance with the commands of the guest-house’s 
Owner,  then  opens  the  door  of  the  grave  in  confidence  and  enters  upon  eternal 
happiness.59 

                                             

58 Qur’an, 2:286. 
59 The reason for these ‘sinces’ is this: I take no notice of the wrongs and tyranny perpetrated 
against my person and give them no importance. I say, “They are not worth worrying about,” and I do 
not interfere in the world. 

 

469

The Addendum to the Sixteenth Letter 

In His Name! 
There is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise. 

Without  reason  ‘the  worldly’  became  suspicious  of  a  powerless  stranger  like 
myself,  and  imagining  me  to  have  the  power  of  thousands  of  people,  put  me  under 
numerous restrictions. They did not give permission for me to stay one or two nights 
in Bedre, a district of Barla, or on one of the mountains of Barla. I heard that they say: 
“Said has power equal to that of fifty thousand soldiers, we cannot therefore set him 
free.” 

So  I  say:  You  unhappy  people  whose  view  is restricted to this world! How is it 
that you do not know the matters of the world, despite working for the world with all 
your  strength,  and  govern  it  like  lunatics?  If  it  is  my  person  you  fear,  it  is  not  fifty 
thousand  soldiers,  one  soldier  even  could  do  more  than  me.  That  is,  he  could  be 
posted at the door of my room and tell me: “You can’t go out!” 

But  if  it  is  my  profession  and  my  being  herald  of  the  Qur’an  and  the  moral 
strength  of  belief  that  you  fear,  then  you  are  wrong,  it  is  not  fifty thousand soldiers, 
you  should  be  aware  that  in  respect  of  my  profession  I  have  the  strength  of  fifty 
million!  For  through  the  strength  of  the  All-Wise  Qur’an,  I  challenge  all  Europe 
including your irreligious people. Through the lights of belief I have published I have 
razed the sturdy bastions they call the physical sciences and Nature. I have cast down 
lower than animals their greatest irreligious philosophers. If all Europe was to gather, 
of  which  your irreligious people are  a part, through God’s assistance, they could not 
make me recant a single matter of that way of mine. God willing, they could not defeat 
me.... 

Since the matter is thus, I do not interfere in your world, so don’t you interfere in 

my hereafter! If you do, if it will be of no avail. 

What is determined by God cannot be turned by force; 
A flame that if lit by God, cannot be extinguished by puffing. 

 

470

‘The  worldly’  are  exceptionally  and  excessively  suspicious  of  me;  quite  simply, 
they  are  frightened  of  me.  Imagining  things  non-existent  in  me,  which  even  if  they 
were  existent  would  not  constitute  a  political  crime  and  could  not  be  the  cause  of 
accusation, like being a shaykh, or of significant rank or family, or being a tribal leader, 
and influential, and having numerous followers, or meeting with people from my native 
region, or being  connected with the affairs of the world, or  even entering politics, or 
even  the  opposition;  imagining  these  things  in  me,  they  have  been  carried  away  by 
groundless fears. At a time even that they are discussing pardoning those in prison and 
outside,  that  is,  those  that  according  to  them  cannot  be  pardoned,  they  have  quite 
simply  barred  me  from  everything.  A  bad  and  ephemeral  person  wrote  the  following 
good and enduring words: 

If tyranny has cannon, shot, and forts, 
Right has an untwistable arm, a constant face. 

And I say: 

If the worldly have rule, power, and strength, 
Through the Qur’an’s effulgence, its servant 
Has unfaltering knowledge, an unsilenceable voice; 
He has an unerring heart, an unquenchable light. 

Many  friends,  as  well  as  a  military  commander  under  whose  surveillance  I  was, 
repeatedly  asked:  “Why  don’t  you  apply  for  the  release  papers  and  put  forward  a 
petition?” 

T h e  A n s w e r :  I do not apply and I cannot apply for five or six reasons: 
The First: I did not interfere in ‘the worldly’s’ world so that I should have been 
convicted  and  apply  to  them.  I  was  convicted  by  Divine  Determining;  my  faults  are 
before it, and I apply to it. 

The  Second:  I  believe  and  have  certain  knowledge  that  this  world  is  a  swiftly 
changing  guest-house.  Therefore,  it  is  not  the  true  homeland  and  everywhere  is  the 
same.  Since  I  am  not going to remain permanently in my homeland, it is pointless to 
struggle  for  it;  it is  not  worth  going  there.  Since  everywhere  is  a  guest-house,  if  the 
mercy of the guest-house’s Owner befriends one, everyone is a friend and everywhere 
familiar.  Whereas  if  it  does  not  befriend  one,  everywhere  is  a  load  on  the  heart  and 
everyone hostile. 

The Third: Application is made within the framework of the law. But the way I 
have  been  treated  these  six  years  has  been arbitrary and outside the law. The Exiles’ 
Law was not applied to me. They looked on me as  

 

471

though  I  had  been  stripped  of  all  the  rights  of  civilization  and  even  of  all  worldly 
rights.  To  apply  in  the  name  of  the  law  to  those  whose  dealings  with  me  have  been 
thus outside the law is meaningless. 

The Fourth: This year, the local official applied in my name for me to stay for a 
few days in the village of Bedre, which is a sort of district of Barla, for a change of air. 
How can those who reject such an unimportant need of mine be applied to? If they are 
applied to, it would be a futile and degrading abasement. 

The  Fifth:  To  claim a right before those who  claim a wrong to be right, and to 
apply to them, is a wrong. It is disrespectful towards right. I do not want to perpetrate 
such a wrong and show disrespect for right. And that is that. 

The Sixth: The distress and difficulty ‘the worldly’ have caused me has not been 
due to politics, because they know I do not meddle in politics and flee from it. Rather, 
knowingly or unknowingly, they torment me on account of aggressive atheism because 
I am bound to religion. In which case, to apply to them  infers regretting religion and 
flattering the cause of aggressive atheism. 

Moreover,  Divine  Determining,  which  is  just,  would  punish  me  through  their 
tyrannical hand on my applying to them and having recourse to them, for they oppress 
me  because  of  my  being  bound  to  religion.  As  for  Divine  Determining,  from  time to 
time  it  represses  me  due  to  my  hypocrisy  before  ‘the  worldly,’  because  of  my 
deficiency in  religion  and  in  sincerity.  Since this is so, for the time being I cannot be 
saved  from  this  distress.  If  I  apply  to  the  worldly,  Divine  Determining  would  say: 
“Hypocrite!  Pay  the  penalty  for  applying!”  And  if  I  do  not  apply,  ‘the  worldly’  say: 
“You don’t recognize us, go on suffering difficulties!” 

The  Seventh  Reason:  It  is  well-known  that an official’s duty is to give harmful 
individuals  no  opportunity  to  cause  harm  and  to  assist  those  who  are  beneficial. 
Whereas the official who took me into custody approached me, an elderly guest at the 
door of the grave, when I was expounding a subtle aspect of belief contained in There 
is no god but God as though I was perpetrating some misdemeanour, although he had 
not been to me for a long time previously. He caused the sincere unfortunate who was 
listening to be deprived, and me to be angry. There were certain people here, and he 
attached  no  importance  to  them.  Then  when  they  acted  discourteously  in  a  way  that 
would poison the life of the village, he started to be gracious and appreciative towards 
them. 

Furthermore, it is well-known that someone in prison who has  

 

472

committed a hundred crimes can meet with the person who supervises him whether the 
official be of high or low rank. But in this last year, although two important people in 
the national government charged with supervising me have passed by my house several 
times, they have absolutely neither met with me nor asked after my condition. At first I 
supposed that they did not come near to me due to enmity, then it became clear that it 
was  due  to  their  fearful  suspicions;  they  were  fleeing  from  me  as  though  as  I  was 
going  to  gobble  them  up.  Thus,  to  recognize  a  government  whose  members  and 
officials are like those men and have recourse to it and apply to it, is not sensible, but a 
futile abasement. If it had been the Old Said, he would have said, like ‘Antara: 

The very water of life becomes Hell through abasement, 
Whereas Hell with dignity becomes a place of pride. 

The Old Said no longer exists, and the New Said considers it meaningless to talk with 
‘the worldly.’ Let  their world be the end of them! They can do what they like. He is 
silent, saying, we shall be judged together with them at the Last Judgement. 

The  Eighth  Reason  for  my  not  applying:  According  to  the  rule,  “The  result  of 
illicit  love  is  merciless  torment,”  Divine  Determining,  which  is  just,  torments  me 
through the tyrannous hand of ‘the worldly’ because I incline towards them, since they 
are not worthy of it. Saying, I deserve this torment, I am silent. For in the Great War I 
fought  and  strove  as  a  Commander  of  a  volunteer  regiment.  Applauded  by  the 
Commander-in-Chief  of  the  army  and  Enver  Pasha,  I  sacrificed  my  valuable students 
and friends. I was wounded and taken prisoner. Returning from captivity, I cast myself 
into  danger  through  works  like  The  Seven  Steps,  aiming  them  at  the  heads  of  the 
British,  who  had  occupied  Istanbul.  I  assisted  those  who  hold  me  without  reason  in 
this torment and captivity. As for them, they punish me in this way for that help. Those 
friends  here  cause  me  in  three  months  the  hardship  and  distress  I  suffered  in  three 
years as a prisoner-of-war in Russia. And the Russians did not prevent me from giving 
religious  instruction,  although  they  regarded  me  as  a  Kurdish  Militia  Commander,  a 
cruel  man  who  had  slaughtered  Cossacks  and  prisoners.  I  used  to  instruct  the  great 
majority of my ninety fellow officer prisoners. One time, the Russian commander came 
and listened. Because he did not know Turkish, he thought it was political instruction, 
and  put  a  stop  to  it.  Then  later  he  gave  permission.  Also,  in  the  same  barracks,  we 
made a room into a mosque, and I used to lead the prayers. They did not interfere at 
all.  They  did  not  prevent  me  from  mixing,  or  from  communicating,  with  the  others. 
Whereas my friends here, my fellow citizens and co-religionists  

 

473

and those for whose benefits in the form of religious belief I have struggled, have held 
me in a tortuous captivity not for three years, but for six, for absolutely no reason and 
although  they  know  I  have  severed  all  my  relations  with  the  world.  They  have 
prevented  me  mixing  with  others.  They  have  prevented  me  from  giving  religious 
instruction, despite my having a certificate, and even from giving private instruction in 
my room. They have prevented me from communicating with others. They have even 
barred  me  from  the  mosque  which  I  repaired  and  where  I  acted  as  prayer-leader  for 
four  years,  although  I  had  the  necessary  certificate.  And  now,  to  deprive  me  of  the 
merit  of  performing  the  prayers  in  congregation,  they  do  not  accept  me  as  prayer-
leader  even  for three private individuals, my permanent congregation and brothers of 
the hereafter. 

Furthermore, if, although I do not want it, someone is to call me good, the official 
who  holds  me  in  surveillance  is  jealous  and  angry.  Thinking  he  will  destroy  my 
influence,  he  entirely  unscrupulously  takes  precautions,  and  pesters  me  in  order  to 
curry favour with his superiors. 

To  whom  can  someone  in  such  a  position  have  recourse  other  than  God 
Almighty?  If  the  judge  is  also  the  claimant,  of  course  he  cannot  complain  to  him. 
Come on, you say! What can we say to this? You say what you like, I say this: there 
are  many  dissemblers  among  these  friends  of  mine.  A  dissembler  is  worse  than  an 
unbeliever. For that reason they make me suffer what the infidel Russian did not make 
me suffer. 

You unfortunates, what have I done to you and what I am doing? I am trying to 
save your belief and am serving your eternal happiness! It means that my service is not 
sincere  and  purely  for  God’s  sake  so  that  it  has  the  reverse  effect.  In  return,  you 
torment me at every opportunity. For sure, we shall meet at the Last Judgement. I say: 
God is enough for us and the best of protectors.60 * The best of lords and the 
best of helpers.61 

                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i 

The Enduring One, He is the Enduring One! 

                                             

60 Qur’an, 3:173. 
61 Qur’an, 8:40. 

 

474

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
I shall explain in three ‘Points’ an effective solace for those who are experiencing 
the  calamity  of  prison,  and  for  those  who  kindly  help  them  and  faithfully  supervise 
their food, which comes from outside. 

First Point: Each day spent in prison may gain as much as ten days’ worship, and, 
with  regards to  their  fruits, may transform those transient hours into enduring hours, 
and through five or ten years’ punishment may be the means of saving a person from 
millions of years of eternal imprisonment. For the believers, the condition for gaining 
this  most  significant  and  valuable  advantage  is  to  perform  the  obligatory  prayers, 
repent  for  the  sins  that  were  the  cause  of  their  imprisonment,  and  offer  thanks  in 
patience.  For  sure,  prison  is  an  obstacle  to  many  sins;  it  does  not  provide  the 
opportunity for them. 

Second Point: Just as the cessation of pleasure causes pain, so does the cessation 
of pain give pleasure. Yes, on thinking of past happy, enjoyable days, everyone feels a 
pang of regret and longing, and says: “Alas!”, and recalling calamitous, unhappy days 
of the past, experiences a sort of pleasure since they are passed, and says: “Praise and 
thanks be to God, that calamity has left its reward and departed.” He breathes a sigh of 
relief.  That  is  to  say,  an  hour’s  temporary  pain  and  sorrow  leave  behind  a  sort  of 
pleasure in the spirit, while a pleasurable hour leaves a pain. 

Since the reality is thus; and since past calamitous hours together with their pains 
are no longer existent, and future distressing days are at the present time non-existent, 
and there is no pain from nothing, to continually eat bread and drink water today, for 
example, because of the possibility of being hungry and thirsty in several days’ time, is 
most foolish. In just the same way, to think now of the past and future unhappy hours, 
which simply do not exist, and to display impatience, and ignoring one’s faulty self, to 
moan as though complaining about God is also most foolish. So long as the power of 
patience  is  not  scattered  to  left  and  right,  that  is,  to  the  past  and  future,  and is  held 
firm in the face of the present of hour and day, it is sufficient. The distress is reduced 
from ten to one. 

In fact, but let it not be complaining, Divine favour pointed out the above fact to 
me while, during a few days of material and spiritual affliction, illness and trial the like 
of which I had never before experienced in my life, I was being crushed in particular by 
the despair and distress of  

 

475

the heart and spirit which resulted from my being unable to serve the Qur’an and belief 
with the Risale-i Nur. I was then content with my distressing illness and imprisonment. 
For, saying: “It is great profit for an unfortunate like myself who waits at the door of 
the grave to make one hour which might be passed in heedlessness ten hours’ worth of 
worship,” I gave thanks. 

Third Point: There is great gain in compassionately aiding and assisting prisoners, 
in  giving  them  the  sustenance  they  need,  and  in  soothing  their  spiritual  wounds  with 
consolation.  Giving  them  their  food  which  comes  from  outside  is  like  alms-giving 
which,  exactly  to  the  amount  of  the  food,  is  written  in  the  book  of  good  deeds  of 
those,  outside  and  inside,  who  do  this,  together  with  the  warders  concerned. 
Especially if the unhappy prisoner is old, ill, poor, or a stranger, then the reward of this 
alms-giving increases many times over. 

The condition of this high profit is to perform the obligatory prayers so that such 
service  is  for  God’s  sake.  Another  condition  is  to  hasten  to  their  assistance  with 
sincerity, compassion and joy, and in such a way as to not make them feel obliged. 

*  *  * 

A Short Addendum from A Guide For Youth 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

Those  in  prison  are  in  great  need  of  the  true  consolation  of  the  Risale-i  Nur. 
Particularly  those  who  having  suffered  the  blows  of  youth,  are  passing  their  sweet, 
young lives in prison; they need the Risale-i Nur as much as they need bread. 

Indeed, youth heeds the emotions rather than reason, and emotions and desires are 
blind;  they  do  not  consider  the  consequences.  They  prefer  one  ounce  of  immediate 
pleasure  to tons  of future  pleasure.  They kill for the one minute pleasure of revenge, 
then  suffer  for  eighty  thousand  hours  the  pain  of  prison.  And  one  hour’s  dissolute 
pleasure  in  questions of honour may result in life’s enjoyment being utterly destroyed 
due to distress at the fear of both prison and enemies. There are many other examples, 
many  pitfalls  for  the  unfortunate  young  because  of  which  they  transform  their sweet 
lives into the most bitter and pitiable lives. 

Consider a vast state to the north;62 it has gained possession of the  

                                             

62 This refers to Russia. [Tr.] 

 

476

passions  of  its  young  people  and  is  shaking  this  century  with  its  storms.  For  it  has 
made  lawful  for  its  youths  the  pleasing  daughters  and  wives  of  upright  people,  and 
these youths act only according to their feelings, which are blind to all consequences. 
By  permitting  men  and  women  to  go  together  to  the  public  baths,  they  are  even 
encouraging  immorality.  And  they  consider  it  lawful  for  vagabonds  and  the  poor  to 
plunder the property of the rich. All mankind trembles in the face of this calamity. 

It  is  therefore  most  necessary  in  this  century  for  all  Muslim  youths  to  act 
heroically, and to respond to this two-pronged attack with keen swords like The Fruits 
of Belief and A Guide For Youth from the Risale-i Nur. Otherwise those unfortunate 
youths  will  destroy  utterly  both  their  futures  in  this  world,  and  their agreeable  lives, 
and  their  happiness  in  the  hereafter,  and  their  eternal  lives,  and  transform  them  into 
torment  and  suffering.  Furthermore, through their abuses and dissoluteness, they will 
end up in hospitals, and through their excesses in life, in prisons. In their old age, they 
will weep copiously with a thousand regrets. 

If, on the other hand, they protect themselves with Qur’anic training and with the 
truths of the Risale-i Nur, they will become truly heroic youths, perfect human beings, 
successful  Muslims,  and  in  some  ways  rulers  over animate beings and the rest of the 
animal kingdom. 

When a youth in prison spends one hour out of the twenty-four each day on the 
five obligatory prayers, and repents for the mistakes that were the cause of his disaster, 
and abstains from other harmful, painful sins, this will be of great benefit for both his 
life, and his future, and his country, and his nation, and his relatives, and he will also 
gain with his fleeting youth of ten to fifteen years an eternal, brilliant youth. Foremost 
the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition,  and  all  the  revealed  scriptures, have given this 
certain good news. 

If such a youth demonstrates through moderation and obedience, his gratitude for 
the  pleasing,  delightful  bounty  of  youth,  it  will  both  increase  it,  and  make  it  eternal, 
and  make  it  a  pleasure.  Otherwise  it  will  be  both  calamitous,  and  become  painful, 
grievous, and a nightmare, and then it will depart. It will cause him to become like a 
vagrant, harmful for both his relatives, and his country, and his nation. 

If  the  prisoner  has  been  sentenced  unjustly,  on  condition  he  performs  the 
obligatory prayers, each hour will be the equivalent of a day’s worship, and the prison 
will be like a recluse’s cell. He will be counted among the pious hermits of olden times 
who retired to caves in order to devote themselves to worship. If he is poor, aged, and 
ill, and desirous of the truths of belief, on condition he performs the obligatory prayers 
and  

 

477

repents,  each  hour  will  become  the  equivalent  of  twenty  hours’  worship,  and  prison 
will become like a rest-house for him, and because of his friends there who regard him 
with  affection,  a  place  of  love,  training,  and  education.  He  will  probably  be  happier 
staying in prison than being free, for outside he is confused and subject to the assaults 
of  sins  from  all  sides.  He  may  receive  a  complete  education  from  prison.  On  being 
released, it will not be as a murderer or thirsting for revenge, but as someone penitent, 
proven  by  trial,  well-behaved,  and  beneficial  for  his  nation.  In  fact,  the  Denizli 
prisoners  became  so  extraordinarily  well-behaved  after  studying  the  Risale-i  Nur  for 
only  a  short  time  that  some  of  those  concerned  said:  “Studying  the  Risale-i  Nur  for 
fifteen  weeks  is  more  effective  at  reforming  them  than  putting  them  in  prison  for 
fifteen years.” 

Since death does not die, and the appointed hour is unknown, it may come at any 
time; and since the grave cannot be closed, and troop after troop enter it and are lost; 
and  since  it  has  been  shown  through  the  truths  of  the  Qur’an  that  for  those  who 
believe  death  is  transformed  into  the  discharge  papers  releasing  them  from  eternal 
annihilation,  while  for  the  corrupt  and  the  dissolute  it  is  disappearing  for  ever  into 
eternal  annihilation,  and  is  unending  separation  from  their  loved  ones  and  all  beings, 
most  certainly  and  with  no  doubt  at  all,  the  most  fortunate  person  is  he  who  with 
patience  and  thanks  fully  benefits  from  his  time  in  prison,  and  studying  the  Risale-i 
Nur works to serve the Qur’an and his belief on the straight path. 

O  man  who  is  addicted  to  enjoyment  and  pleasure!  I  am  seventy-five  years  old, 
and I know with utter certainty from thousands of experiences, proofs, and events that 
true  enjoyment,  pain-free  pleasure,  grief-free  joy,  and  life’s  happiness  are  only  to  be 
found in belief and in the sphere of the truths of faith. While a single worldly pleasure 
yields numerous pains; as though dealing ten slaps for a single grape, it drives away all 
life’s pleasure. 

O  you  unfortunates  who  are  experiencing  the  misfortune  of  prison!  Since  your 
world is weeping and your life is bitter, strive so that your hereafter will not also weep, 
and  your  eternal  life  will smile and be sweet! Benefit from prison! Just as sometimes 
under severe conditions in the face of the enemy, an hour’s watch may be equivalent to 
a  year’s  worship,  so  in  the  severe  conditions  you  are  experiencing,  the  hardship  of 
each hour spent as worship becomes the equivalent of many hours, it transforms that 
hardship into mercy. 

 

478

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
I  offer  you  not  my condolences but my congratulations. Since for some instance 
of  wisdom  Divine  Determining  has  sent  us to this third School of Joseph (Medrese-i 
Yusufiye),63  and  has  specified  that  we  should  eat  some  of  the  sustenance  allotted  us 
here  and  it  is  that  sustenance  that  has  summoned  here;  and  since  as  we  have 
understood  certainly  from  our  past  experiences,  Divine  favour  has  manifested  on  us 
the  meaning  of  the  verse,  It  is  possible  that  you  dislike  a  thing  which  is  good  for 
you;64 and since our new brothers here in this School of Joseph are in more need of the 
solace of the Risale-i Nur than anyone, and the members of the judiciary are more in 
need of the rules and other sacred laws set out in the Risale-i Nur than other officials; 
and  since  the  very  numerous  copies  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  are  performing  your  duty 
outside  and  their conquests do not cease; and since  each fleeting hour passed here is 
the equivalent of eternal hours passed in worship; surely, because of these points, we 
should joyfully offer thanks for this affair in perfect patience and with fortitude. I am 
going  to  repeat  exactly  to  you  all  the  short  letters  I  wrote  as  consolation  in  Denizli 
Prison. God willing, those apposite notes will comfort you too. 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly:  I  offer  Almighty  God  endless  thanks  that  heroes  have  emerged  from 
among  the  Muftis,  preachers,  imams,  and  hojas,  for  it  is  they who in fact should lay 
claim  to  the  Risale-i  Nur.  Up  to  now,  it  has  been  the  youth,  those  educated  in  the 
secular schools, and their teachers who have been devoted to the Risale-i Nur. Now, 
thanks  be  to  God,  Ethem,  the  Ibrahim’s  and  Ali  Osman’s  have  cleared  the  names  of 
the  students and teachers of the religious schools, and transformed their timidity into 
courage. 

Secondly:  They should not worry about this incident, which occurred due to their 
whole-hearted  activities  and  excitement.  For  in  respect  of  its  consequences,  Denizli 
Prison  caused  those  who  had  acted  incautiously  to  be  congratulated.  Its  difficulties 
were few and immaterial benefits, numerous. This third School of Joseph will not lag 
behind the second, God willing. 

Thirdly: Since the merit increases proportionately to the hardships, we  

                                             

63 Recalling the imprisonment of Yusuf, related in the Qur’an, Bediuzzaman called prison 
‘Medrese-i Yusufiye’, the School of Joseph, impressing on his students that prison was essentially a 
place of study and training. [Tr.] 

64 Qur’an, 2:216. 

 

479

should  offer  thanks  for  these  conditions.  We  should  try  to  perform  our  duties  of 
serving  religious  belief  with  sincerity,  which  is  our  duty,  and  not  concern  ourselves 
with  being  successful  or  obtaining  good  results,  which  is  God’s  concern.  We  should 
say: “The best matters are the most difficult,”65 and patiently offer thanks in the face of 
our  difficulties  in  this  place  of  trial.  We  should  understand  that  it  is  a  sign  of  the 
acceptability  of  our  actions  and  a  diploma  for  having  passed  the  examination  of  our 
sacred struggle. 

* * * 

I have a petition I want to put before the prison administrators, 
and chiefly the Prison Governor, which is apparently unimportant, but has great 
importance in my eyes 

After spending twenty-two years in total isolation, my seventy-five-year-old body 
cannot  sustain  inoculations.  In  fact,  long  ago  they  inoculated  me,  and  it  left  a 
suppurating wound which persisted for twenty years. It was like a chronic poisoning. 
Two  doctors  in  Emirdağ  and  my  friends  there  know  this.  Also,  four  years  ago  in 
Denizli  they  inoculated  me  together  with  all  the  other  prisoners.  Although  it  had  no 
harmful  effects  on  any  of  them,  it  made  me  ill  for  three  weeks.  Through  Divine 
preservation, I was not forced to go to the hospital, which for me is dangerous. It is 
absolutely  certain  that  my  body  cannot  take  inoculations.  Both  my  excuses  are 
powerful,  and  being  extremely  weak  at  the  age  of  seventy-five,  I  can  take  the 
inoculation only of a ten-year-old child. Moreover, because I am in perpetual solitary 
confinement, I do not have contact with anyone. Also, two months ago the provincial 
governor sent two doctors to Emirdağ to give me a thorough examination. They could 
find  no  trace  of  any  contagious disease,  only  that I had lumbago, and was extremely 
weak,  elderly,  and  alone.  This  condition  of  mine  certainly  does  not  oblige  me  to  be 
inoculated. 

I  also  have  a  very  important  request  of  you:  Don’t  send  me  to  hospital.  Don’t 
force me into a situation I could never have endured these twenty-two years of solitary 
confinement,  that  is,  to  be  put  under  the  command  of  nurses  I  do  not  know.  I  have 
started  to  think  of  entering  the  grave  as  being  pleasant,  but  for  now  I  have  chosen 
prison,  for  the  sake  of  the  prison  administrators,  whose  humanity  I  have  witnessed, 
and to console the other prisoners. 

                                             

65 ‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 55; Muhammad al-Shaybani, Sharh al-Sirat al-Kabir, i, 11. 

 

480

My Dear , Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly:  Don’t be upset at my being ill-treated or  at the contempt  directed at my 
person.  For  they  can  find  no  fault  in  the  Risale-i  Nur  so  struggle  against  my 
unimportant  and  faulty  self  instead.  I  am  pleased  at  this.  I  am  bound by what I have 
learnt from the Risale-i Nur to proudly offer thanks, if for its well-being and honour, I 
suffer pains, misfortune, and insults even a thousand times greater. So you should not 
pity me in this respect. 

Secondly:  The  widespread,  fierce,  and  merciless  attack  has  for  now  abated 
twentyfold.  They  rounded  up  a  few  people  in  place  of  thousands  of  ‘special’  (has)66 
Risale-i Nur students, and a handful of new brothers instead of hundreds of thousands 
of people who are concerned. That is, Divine grace made the assault very insignificant. 
Thirdly:  Through  Divine  grace,  the  former  provincial  governor,  who  for  two 
years  was  conspiring  against  us,  has  been  repulsed,  and  there  is  a  strong  possibility 
that the Interior Minister, whose suspicions had been excessively aroused about us, has 
ameliorated this fierce assault due to his being from the same place and his forefathers 
having been very religious. So do not despair or be alarmed! 

Fourthly:  Numerous  experiences  and  events  have  shown  in  a  way  to  make  one 
completely certain that if the Risale-i Nur weeps, either the earth quakes or the skies 
weep too. As we have often seen with our own eyes and in part proved in court, the 
start  of  winter  smiling  like  summer  in  unprecedented  fashion  coincided  with  the 
Risale-i  Nur  smiling  at  its  being  secretly  duplicated  by  machine  and  published,  and 
then  on  its  weeping  when  it  came  to  a  standstill  with  the  widespread  searches  and 
confiscations, this coincided with the sudden severe wrath and weeping of winter. It is 
my guess that this is a powerful sign that the Risale-i Nur is a supreme, shining miracle 
of the Qur’an’s reality this age, and that the earth and universe are concerned with it. 

                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
It  suddenly  occurred  to  me  today  that  rather  than  offering  condolences  to  those 
sent by Divine Determining and destiny to this ‘school’ in connection with the Risale-i 
Nur, I should congratulate them. For each has come in place of perhaps a thousand of 
our innocent brothers, saving them to an  

                                             
66 See, page 445, footnote 38. 

 

481

extent  from  trouble.  Moreover,  together  with  continuing  to  serve  belief,  they  are 
performing  a  huge  service  in  a  short  time,  like  doing  a  hundred  year’s  work  in  ten 
years.  Also,  they  are  embarking  on  this  exacting  struggle  and  the  trial  of  this  new 
‘School  of  Joseph,’  in  order  to  have  a  active  share  in  its  universal,  far-reaching  and 
valuable  consequences.  They  are  also  meeting  with  their  loyal,  sincere  brothers 
without difficulty, whom they were eager to see, and they are studying together. Since 
the easy times in this world do not continue and go for nothing, surely the people who 
make high gains with such little trouble should be congratulated. 

My brothers! This widespread attack is against the Risale-i Nur’s conquests. But 
they have understood that the more the Risale-i Nur is attacked, the more brilliantly it 
shines;  the  circle  of  those  it  teaches  is  expanded  and  gains  in  importance;  it  is  not 
defeated; it only slips behind the veil of sirran tanawwarat.67 For this reason they have 
changed their tactics and no longer attack the Risale-i Nur openly. But Divine favour 
overspreads us, so we should offer thanks in perfect patience. 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
It has become necessary to explain two of my strange and subtle states of mind. 
The  First:  When,  being  in  solitary  confinement,  I  was  unable  to  meet  with  my 
brothers such as yourselves, whom I love more than my life, it was imparted to me that 
there  was  a  Divine  favour  and  a  benefit  in  this. For numerous of our brothers of  the 
hereafter  were  spending  fifty  liras  coming  to  Emirdağ  to  see  me,  for  fifty  minutes, 
some  for  ten  minutes,  and  some  returned  without  seeing  me  at  all,  and  these  they 
would have thrown into this School of Joseph on some pretext. Even if with my little 
available time and the state of mind arising from my seclusion I had been able to, the 
work of serving the Risale-i Nur would not have permitted me to converse at length 
with those devoted friends. 

Secondly: One time a famous scholar was seen on numerous fronts in the War by 
those  who  had  gone  to  the jihad. They said to him... And he replied: “Certain saints 
are doing this in my place in order to gain reward for me and allow the people of belief 
to benefit from my teaching.” In  

                                             

ibn Abi Talib. 

67 Sirran tanawwarat: a phrase taken from the qasidat al-Jaljalutiyya, attributed to Imam ‘Ali 

 

482

exactly  the  same  way,  in  Denizli  it  was  even  made  known  officially  that  I  had  been 
seen  in  mosques  there,  and the  governor  and  warders  were  informed.  Some  of  them 
became  alarmed,  asking,  “Who  opened  the  prison  gates  for  him?”  Exactly  the  same 
thing happened here. But rather than attributing a very minor wonder to my own very 
faulty  and  unimportant  self,  The  Ratifying  Stamp  of  the  Unseen  Collection,  which 
proves and demonstrates the Risale-i Nur’s wonders, wins confidence in it a hundred 
or rather a thousand times more, and ratifies its acceptance. And the heroic students of 
the  Risale-i  Nur  in  particular  ratify  it  with  their  pens  and  states,  which  are  truly 
wonders. 

                                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Don’t worry about me, I am pleased and happy just to be together with you in the 

same building.  

Our  task  now:  one  set  of  my  defence  speeches  should  be  sent  to  Isparta.  If 
possible,  twenty  copies  should  be  made  both  in  the  new  letters,  and  by  duplicating 
machine  in  the  old.  It  should  even  be  shown  to  the  public  prosecutor  there.  A copy 
should  also  be  given  to  our  lawyer  in  person,  and  another  copy  given  to  the  prison 
governor, which he should give to our defence lawyer. It should  also be  sent in both 
the new letters and the old to the departments of government in Ankara, as it was sent 
while  we  were  in  Denizli.  If  possible,  five  copies  should  be  prepared  to  send  to 
Ankara. For the  copies of the Risale-i Nur in the old letters which were seized, were 
sent  to  those  departments,  and  particularly  to  the  Directorate  of  Religious  Affairs, 
before  being  sent  here.  Also,  tell  our  lawyer,  Ahmed  Bey,  that  when  writing  out  my 
defence on the typewriter to pay especial attention to its being correct. For my manner 
of  expression  does  not  resemble  anyone  else’s.  Sometimes  a  wrong  letter,  or  even  a 
wrong  point,  changes the matter in question and spoils the meaning. Also, if you are 
not  given  permission  to  use  the  two  typewriters  that  have  been  sent,  they  should  be 
returned.  Also  don’t  become  alarmed  or  dismayed.  And  don’t  despair.  As  the  verse 
Verily with every difficulty, there is relief68 infers, Divine favour will swiftly come to 
our aid, God willing. 

                                             

68 Qur’an, 94:6. 

 

483

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
The Risale-i Nur meets with you in my place and gives excellent instruction to the 
new brothers who are eager for it. We have seen from experience that to be occupied 
with  the  Risale-i  Nur  by  either  studying  it,  or  reading  it  out  loud,  or  writing  it  out, 
affords  an  expansiveness  to  the  heart,  an  ease  to  the  spirit,  health  to  the  body,  and 
makes  sustenance  plentiful.  Now  a  hero  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  like  Husrev  has  been 
bestowed on you. God willing, this School of Joseph will be another blessed place of 
study, part of the Medresetü’z-Zehra.69 Up to now, I had not shown Husrev70 to ‘the 
worldly,’  and  I  was  hiding  him.  But  the  published  collections  have  shown  him  up 
completely  to  the  politicians,  and  nothing  secret  has  remained.  I  have  therefore 
described two or three of  his tasks to my ‘special’ (has) brothers. But now before us 
among those who will listen to the truth are two awesomely obdurate people. One of 
them emerged in Emirdağ, on account of both atheism and communism, and the other 
here. They are trying with extreme cunning to alarm the officials and turn them against 
us with slander. At present we have therefore to act with the greatest caution and not 
be scared, and to bide our time relying on God till His grace comes to our assistance. 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise. 

My friends in prison and brothers in religion! 
It occurred to me to explain a truth to you which will save you from both worldly 

torment and the torment of the hereafter. It is as follows: 

For example, a person killed someone’s brother or one of his relatives. A murder 

which yields one minute’s pleasure of revenge causes millions  

                                             

69 Medresetü’z-Zehrâ: the Islamic university Bediuzzaman had since his early youth 
endeavoured to found in eastern Anatolia, in which the modern and religious sciences would be 
taught side by side, and which he intended would play the central and unifying role in Asia that al-
Azhar plays in Africa. Despite twice receiving funds for it and actually laying the foundations, it was 
never completed due to the vicissitudes of the times. Although it was not realized in the form he had 
originally foreseen, while in Kastamonu (1936-’43), he wrote: “Endless thanks be to Almighty God 
for He has made the province of Isparta into a Medresetü’z-Zehrâ, which has long been the goal of 
my dreams, —into an al-Azhar University.” See, Kastamonu Lahikase (1960), 172. [Tr.] 

70 Husrev Altinbasak (1899-1977) was from Isparta and became one of Bediuzzaman’s leading 

students. With his fine handwriting he wrote out hundreds of copies of the treatises of the Risale-i 
Nur. He is reputed to written nine copies of the Qur’an showing the ‘coincidences’ of the name of 
‘Allah’. He was together with Bediuzzaman in the prisons of Eskishehir, Denizli, and Afyon. [Tr.] 

 

484

of  minutes  of  both  distress  for  the  heart  and  the  anguish  of  prison.  And  the  fear  of 
revenge  by  the  murdered  man’s  relatives,  and  anxiety  of  finding  himself  face  to  face 
with his enemy drives away all his pleasure in life. He suffers the torment of both fear 
and  anger.  There  is  only  one  solution  for  this,  and  that  is  reconciliation,  which  the 
Qur’an  commands,  and  truth,  reality,  benefit,  humanity,  and  Islam  require  and 
encourage. 

Certainly, in reality what is required is peace, because the appointed hour is set, it 
does not change. Since his appointed hour had come, in any event the murdered man 
would have stayed no longer. As for the murderer, he was the means of God’s decree 
being  carried  out.  So  long  as  there  is  no  reconciliation, both  sides  perpetually  suffer 
the torments of fear and revenge. It is because of this that Islam commands that “one 
believer  should  not  be  vexed  with  another  believer  for  more  than  three  days.”  If the 
murder  was  not  the  result  of  a  vindictive  grudge  and  enmity,  and  a  two-faced 
troublemaker  instigated  the discord,  it  is essential to make peace quickly. Otherwise, 
the  minor  disaster  becomes  a  large  one,  and  continues.  If  they  make  peace,  and  the 
murderer  repents  and  prays  continuously  for  the  man  he  killed,  then  both  sides  will 
gain  much  and  become  like  brothers.  In  place  of  one  departed  brother,  he  will  gain 
several religious brothers. He will be resigned to Divine Decree and Determining and 
forgive  his  enemy.  Especially  since  they  heed  the  lessons  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  both 
individual  and  public  peace  and  well-being,  and  the  brotherhood  that  there  is  in  the 
sphere  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  require  that  they  put  aside  all  the  hard  feelings  that exist 
between them. 

It was thus in Denizli Prison; all the prisoners who were enemies became brothers 
through  the  lessons  of  the  Risale-i  Nur.  It  was  one  reason  for  our  acquittal,  and 
caused  even  the  irreligious  and  ungodly  to  say  about  those  prisoners:  “Masha’llah! 
Barakallah!” Also it was an utter relief for those prisoners. I myself have seen here a 
hundred  men  suffer  inconvenience  on  account  of  one  man  and  not  go  out  to  take 
exercise  together.  It  is  oppression  towards  them.  A  manly  believer  of  sound 
conscience  will  not  cause  hundreds  of  other  believers  harm  because  of  some  petty 
error  or  benefit.  If  he  makes  a  mistake  and  does  cause  harm,  he  should  repent 
immediately. 

 

485

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
I  congratulate  both  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  you  all,  and  myself,  and  give  you  the 
good news of Husrev, Hıfzı, and Bartinli Seyyid. Those who went on the Hajj this year 
learnt  that  prominent  scholars  in  Mecca  were  translating  the  main  collections  of  the 
Risale-i Nur into both Arabic and Hindustani and were trying to have them published. 
They had also found such favour in Medina that they  had  been placed on the blessed 
tomb of the Prophet (PBUH) in the Rawdat al-Mutahhara. Haji Seyyid saw with his 
own eyes The Staff of Moses (Asâ-yi Mûsa) on the Prophet’s tomb. That means it has 
been  found  acceptable  by  the  Prophet  (PBUH)  and  was  met  with  pleasure  by  him 
(PBUH). As we told those who were going from here to make the Hajj, we had made 
the intention and the Risale-i Nur was going to visit those blessed places in our stead. 
Endless  thanks  be  to  God,  one  of  the  many  benefits  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  heroes 
publishing  those  collections  after  having  corrected  them,  is  that  they  saved  me  both 
from  the  task  of  correcting  them  myself  and  from  that  anxiety;  so  too,  since  those 
copies  will  form  the  source  for  others  written  out  by  hand,  they  have  become  like 
hundreds  of  ‘correctors.’  May  the  Most  Merciful  of  the  Merciful  have written in the 
records  of  their  good  works,  a  thousand  merits  for  each  letter  of  those  collections. 
Amen. Amen. Amen. 

* * * 

An Auspicious Dream 
which turned out to be true 

Ali,  who  assists  me,  came  to  me  and  said:  “I  had  a  dream  in  which  you  and 
Husrev  kissed  the  hand  of  the  Prophet  Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon 
him).” Then I received the letter telling me that the Hajjis had seen The Staff of Moses 
Collection,  which  had  been written  out  by  Husrev,  on  the  Prophet’s   (PBUH) tomb. 
This  is  to say, in effect The Staff of Moses kissed the Prophet’s (PBUH) hand in my 
place by means of Husrev’s pen, and was found acceptable by the Prophet (PBUH). 

 

486

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers and Companions in Prison! 
Firstly:  Do  not  worry  that  we  have  not  been  able  to  meet  in  person.  We  are 
constantly  together  in  spirit.  Whichever  of  the  treatises  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  you  are 
able to get hold of and read, and which you listen to, you will see me within it, but as a 
servant  of  the  Qur’an  instead  of my insignificant person, and you  may converse with 
me.  For  my  part,  I  meet  with  you  in  imagination  in  all  my  prayers  and  in  what  you 
have  written,  and  it  is  as  though  we  are  all  the  time  together  in  some  sphere  of 
existence. 

Secondly: We say this to the new students of the Risale-i Nur in this new School 
of  Joseph:  as  indicated  by  the  Qur’an,  and  as  even  the  committee  of  experts  had  to 
admit,  “The  faithful  Risale-i  Nur  students  will  enter  their  graves  in  a  state  of  belief. 
And  through  the  effulgence  its  collective  personality,  according  to  his  degree,  each 
student receives a share of the spiritual gains and supplications of all his brothers. It is 
as  though  each  seeks  Divine  forgiveness  and  worships  with  thousands  of  tongues.” 
These two profits and results reduce to nothing all the difficulties and hardships of this 
extraordinary time; the two high profits are given their faithful customers at a very lost 
cost. 

                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
The  Afyon  defences  contain  important truths concerning both ourselves, and the 

Risale-i Nur, and this country, and the Islamic world. 

It is probably necessary to prepare five to ten copies of them in the new letters so 
they may be sent to the departments of government in Ankara. Whether they release us 
or punish us is of no importance, our task now is to inform both the Government, and 
the  courts,  and  the  nation  of  the  truths  the  defences  contain.  Perhaps  that  was  one 
reason Divine Determining sent us to this place of study. They should be written out 
by typewriter as quickly as possible. Even if they were to release us today, we would 
still be obliged to send them to Ankara. Don’t be deceived and put it off; enough now! 
Let  this be our last defence in the face of the extreme oppression and unprecedented 
torments we have suffered three times in fifteen years for the same matter on trumped-
up charges. Since in  

 

487

the  previous  courts  they  legally  gave  us  a  typewriter  so  that  we  could  defend 
ourselves,  they  can  cite  no  law  for  depriving  us  of  the  right  here.  If  you  find  no 
solution officially, our lawyer should write out five copies outside on a typewriter, but 
he should pay great attention to their containing no mistakes. 

                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Loyal New Brothers and Old Prisoners! 
I  have  formed  the  firm  conclusion  that,  in  respect  of  Divine  favour,  you  are  an 
important cause in our entering here. That is to say, with its consolation and the truths 
of  belief,  the  Risale-i  Nur  is  to  save  both  you  from  the  distress  of  this  calamity  of 
prison and from much worldly harm, and your life from passing profitlessly and in vain 
through grief and sorrow and being wasted on the winds of fancy, and your hereafter 
from weeping like your world is weeping now; it is to provide you with true solace. 

Since  the  reality  of  the  matter  is  this,  of  course  you  must  be  brothers  to  one 
another, like the Denizli prisoners and students of  the Risale-i Nur. You can see that 
they examine all your possessions, and food, bread, and soup which come from outside 
so  that  a  knife  does  not  get  in  among  you  and  you  do  not  attack  one  another.  The 
warders  who  faithfully  serve  you  suffer  much  trouble.  Also,  you  do  not  go  out  to 
exercise  together,  as  though  you  were  going  to  attack  one  another  like  wild  beasts. 
New friends, who are by nature bold and courageous! With great moral courage you 
should say to the group at this time: 

“If not knives, but Mausers and revolvers were given us, and the order to fire as 
well,  we  would  not  hurt  our  friends  who  are  unfortunate  and  suffering  this  calamity 
like  ourselves.  Through  the  guidance  and  at  the  command  of  the  Qur’an,  and  belief, 
and Islamic brotherhood, and our interests, we have decided to forgive them and to try 
not to offend them, even if formerly there were a hundred reasons for our hatred and 
hostility,” so transforming this prison into an auspicious place of study.  

 

488

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Just as every group of the worldly engaged in politics, art, or some duty, or some 
task  related  to  the  life  of  society,  or  some  particular  commercial  activity,  gathers 
together in congresses of a sort to discuss its work, so the Risale-i Nur students, who 
are engaged in the sacred service of certain, verified belief,71 have gathered together in 
the congress of this School of Joseph at the order of Divine Determining, impelled by 
dominical grace. God willing, numerous valuable, beneficial and significant results will 
be bestowed in  consequence, and  that if the leading students have a value of ‘one’ in 
other places like an alif,72 here coming shoulder to shoulder with three other alifs and 
meeting  with  them,  they  will  become  one  thousand  one  hundred  and  eleven,  and  in 
consequence of this coming together their value, and God willing, their sacred service 
and reward, will be a thousandfold; the single alif will become a thousand. 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
The  reason  they  nailed  up  my  window  today  was  my  greeting  the  prisoners  in 
connection  with the trial. They apparently made something else the pretext. Don’t be 
at  all  anxious.  On  the  contrary,  since  they  are  preoccupied  with  my  unimportant 
person  and  not  causing  too  much  trouble  to  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  its  students,  I  am 
earnestly  and  sincerely  pleased.  Since  they  are  persecuting  me  by  insulting  and 
tormenting  my  person,  it  means  they  are  not  doing  the  same to you and the Risale-i 
Nur, and lessens to an extent their interfering with the Risale-i Nur, so I offer thanks 
in patience and am not anxious. You too should not be at all upset. I am of the opinion 
that our covert enemies’ directing the attention of the officials towards my person is an 
instance of Divine favour and a good thing from the point of view of the well-being of 
the Risale-i Nur and its students. Certain of our brothers should not become angry and 
speak  sharply.  They  should  act  circumspectly  and  not  become  alarmed.  They  also 
should not speak of this matter to everyone. For there are spies who attach the wrong 
meanings to what our naive brothers and those who are not yet accustomed to being 
cautious, say. The spies make mountains out of molehills  

                                             

71 ‘Certain, verified belief’: an approximate translation of tahkikî  (Arabic: tahqiqi) iman. It also 
has the meaning of ‘ascertained through enquiry,’ ‘resulting from investigation,’ and ‘confirmatory.’ 
See also, page 569, footnote 1. [Tr.] 

72 Alif: the first letter of the Arabic alphabet, the numerical value of which is one, and which is 

written as a vertical dash. [Tr.] 

 

489

and may inform on them. Our situation now is no joking matter. Nevertheless, do not 
be  at  all  worried.  We  are  under  Divine  protection  and  are  resolved  to  meet  all 
hardships  with  perfect  patience,  indeed,  with  thanks.  We are obliged to offer thanks, 
for a small amount of hardship yields plentiful mercy and reward. 

                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
For  two  important  reasons,  and  in  consequence  of  a  powerful  warning,  I  have 
been  obliged  to  leave,  with  respect  to  the  heart,  the  task  of  all  the  defences  to  the 
Risale-i Nur students who have been sent here and will be its leading students in the 
future, especially H, R, T, F, S.73 

First  Reason:  I  understood  certainly  both  in  the  examining  magistrate’s  office, 
and from numerous other signs, that as far as they possibly can they are trying to make 
difficulties for me and to prevent me defeating them intellectually, and that they have 
received  official  communications.  They  are  not  allowing  me  to  speak  on  various 
pretexts  as  though  if  I do, I  shall  display political and scholarly prowess sufficient to 
silence the court, and practised diplomats. In fact, while being questioned, I replied “I 
don’t  know”  to  one  of  the  questions.  In  astonishment  the  judge  asked:  “How  could 
someone  of  your  extraordinary  intelligence  forget  something?”  They  suppose  the 
wondrous elevatedness of the Risale-i Nur and its scholarly findings to be the product 
of  my  thought  and  they  have  taken  fright.  They  do  not  want  to  let  me  speak.  Also, 
they  think  that  anyone  who  meets  with  me  immediately  becomes  a  devoted  Risale-i 
Nur  student,  so  they  do  not  allow  me  to  meet  with  anyone.  The  Head  of  the 
Directorate  of  Religious  Affairs  even  said:  “Whoever  meets  with  him  is  immediately 
drawn to him; his power to attract is considerable.” 

This means that the best thing for us now is for me to hand over my work to you. 
And  my  old  and  new  defence  speeches,  which  you  have,  should  take  part  in  your 
consultations in my place. That is sufficient. 

The Second Reason: This is being left to another time. However, a brief indication 
of that warning is this: an extremely powerful duty which looks to the hereafter and an 
effective  state  of  mind,  which  for  twenty-five  years  have  made  me  give  up  politics, 
newspapers, and other transi 

                                             

73 Husrev, Re’fet, Tahiri, Feyzi, and Sabri. 

 

tory  things,  and  prevented  me  being  occupied  with  them,  are  most  definitely 
preventing  me  being  preoccupied  with  this  question  in  detail.  When  consulting  with 
your two defence lawyers, you may sometimes discuss my duty too. 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
This  was  imparted  to  me  now  as  I  was  performing  the  prayers:  because of their 
excessively good opinion of you, your brothers await instruction and assistance, both 
material and spiritual, from you. Just as in worldly affairs you have handed things over 
to the ‘special’ (has) students, leaving them to the leading students (erkan) to confer 
over,  and  you  were  right  to  do  so,  so  you  have  appointed  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  the 
collective personality of its students to perform your scholarly work related to belief, 
the  Qur’an  and  the  hereafter,  and  the  collective  personality  of  those  purely  sincere 
‘special’  students  performs  that  duty  of  yours  much  more  completely  than  you,  in 
addition  to  the  duties  of  its  members.  They  always  have  done  so  up  to  now.  For 
instance, someone who meets with you and receives brief, minor instruction and a little 
advice, may receive from a single part of the Risale-i Nur instruction a hundred times 
greater.  They  may  also  receive  advice  from  it.  Thinking  that  their  collective 
personality, whose ‘station’ is extremely elevated and prayers acceptable, is an ‘Ustad’ 
and helper who, God willing, is always with them, it was consolation for my spirit, and 
good news, and made me feel at peace. 

490

* * * 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
There  being  two  small  explosions  in  two  days  in  extraordinary  and  meaningful 

fashion when there was no apparent reason for them, does not resemble chance. 

The  First:  The  cast-iron  stove  in  my  ward  suddenly  made  a  loud  bang  like  a 
revolver, and the thick, strong iron of its lower part exploded like bomb, splitting into 
two  pieces.  Hamdi  the  Tailor  was  startled  and  we  were  left  in  astonishment.  For  on 
numerous occasions this winter it had been red hot with the coal, and had withstood it. 
The  Second:  The  second  day  in  Feyzi’s ward, for  no reason at all the beaker on 
top of the water pitcher suddenly disintegrated in extraordinary fashion. It occurred to 
me that the terrible bombs prepared against us in  

 

491

Ankara  caused  our  defence  speeches,  which  had  been  sent  to  six  departments  of 
government  there,  to  explode,  without  causing  us  harm,  God  willing;  and  the  angry 
stove  which  had  been  lit  against  us  split  into  two  without  harming  us.  It  is  also 
possible  that  my  beloved  stove,  my  only  and  very  useful  companion,  listened  to  my 
sorrows  and  entreaties,  and  was  giving  me  the  news:  “You’re  going  to  depart  from 
this dark dungeon, no need remains for me...” 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

Today, due to a spiritual warning, I felt a disquiet, a grief, on account of you. Just 
when  I  was  feeling  upset  at  those  of  my  brothers  who  being  anxious  about  their 
livelihoods want to be released quickly, a blessed memory occasioned a truth and some 
good  tidings  to  be  imparted  to  me:  the  ‘Three  Months’  will  begin  in  five  days  time, 
which  are  truly  blessed  and  are  the  months  of  highly  meritorious  worship.  For  if  the 
reward yielded by good works at other times are tenfold, in the month of Rajab they 
are  more  than  a  hundredfold,  in  Sha‘ban  they  exceed  three  hundredfold,  and  in 
Ramadan  they  reach  a  thousandfold,  while  on  Fridays  in  Ramadan  they  reach 
thousands and on the Night of Power may reach thirty thousand. It is certainly highly 
profitable therefore, to spend those three months —which are thus a sacred market for 
the  trade  of  the  hereafter  earning  plentiful  gains  for  it,  and  an  exceptional  exhibition 
for the people of reality and worship, and in three months may secure for the believers 
a  life  of  eighty  years—  in  this  School  of  Joseph,  which  increases  the  profits  tenfold. 
Whatever  the  hardships  suffered,  they  are pure  mercy.  As  with  worship,  so  with the 
service  of  the  Risale-i  Nur;  with  respect  not  to  quantity  but  quality,  its  profits  are 
fivefold.  For  people  are  continuously  entering  this  guest-house,  then  being  released, 
and  they  are means  of  the  Risale-i Nur’s  lessons being disseminated. Sometimes one 
man’s sincerity yields the benefits of twenty men. It is of no importance if such a man 
suffers a little hardship and distress so that the mystery of the Risale-i Nur’s sincerity 
might spread among the unfortunate prisoners, who are inclined to be political heroes 
and  are  much  in  need  of  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  solace.  In  regard  to  the  problem  of 
livelihood, since these three months are a market for the hereafter, I felt perfectly easy 
at it and understood that being here inside until the Bayram74 is a great bounty, for  

                                             

the end of Ramadan. [Tr.] 

74 Bayram: Arabic, ‘Id, the two big festivals in the Muslim calendar. Here, the festival marking 

 

492

since  all  of  you  were  sent  to  this  prison  in  place  of  numerous  other  Risale-i  Nur 
students, and some of you  in place of a thousand, they will help out in your business 
outside. 

                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly:  I  offer  you  congratulations  with  all  my  heart  and  soul  for  the  month  of 

Rajab and the holy night of Ragha’ib tomorrow. 

Secondly:  Don’t  give  up  hope,  and  don’t  worry  or  be  alarmed.  God  willing, 
Divine grace will come to our aid. The bomb that was being prepared these last three 
months  exploded.  The  news  given  by  my  stove,  Feyzi’s  beaker,  and  Husrev’s  two 
drinking-cups turned out to be true. But it was not terrible, it was slight. God willing, 
the  fire  will  be  extinguished  completely.  All  their  assaults  are  to  discredit  my  person 
and taint the Risale-i Nur’s conquests. The blow the man more harmful than the covert 
dissembler  in  Emirdağ  and  merely  a  pawn  in  the  hands  of  secret  atheists,  and  the 
‘semi-hoja’ who favours the innovations, were trying to strike us as hard as they could 
was  reduced  twentyfold.  God  willing,  they  will  cause  us  not  even  one  wound,  and 
what they think and intend and their plans to scare us away from each other and from 
the Risale-i Nur will come to nothing. It is absolutely essential that out of respect for 
these  blessed  months,  trusting  that  they  are  gaining  abundant  reward  for  us,  we 
steadfastly  offer  thanks  in  patience,  and  relying  on  God,  submit  to  the  rule  ‘He  who 
believes in Divine Determining is saved from unhappiness.’ 
                                                           S a i d  N u r s i 

 

493

To the Prime Minister’s Office, the Ministry of Justice, 
and Ministry of Home Affairs75 

All  members  of  the  Government  who  saw  the  Proclamation  of  the  Constitution, 
the  First  World  War,  the  Armistice  Period,  the  setting  up  of  the  Nationalist 
Government, and the Republic know me well. Nevertheless, with your permission, we 
shall take a look at my life as though on a film. 

I was born in the village of Nurs in the province of Bitlis. As a student, I debated 
with  the  scholars  I  encountered,  and  through  Divine  favour,  defeating  in  scholarly 
debate all who opposed me, I came as far as Istanbul. In Istanbul, winning calamitous 
fame, a victim of my rivals’ trouble-making, I was dragged to the lunatic asylum on the 
orders of Sultan ‘Abdulhamid. On the Proclamation of the Constitution, I attracted the 
attention  of  the  government  of  the  Committee  of  Union  and  Progress  with  my 
activities  during  the  Thirty-First  of  March  Incident.  I  confronted  them  with  the 
proposal  to  open  an  Islamic  university  in  Van  called  the  Medresetü’z-Zehra, 
resembling  al-Azhar  University.  I  even  laid  its  foundations.  On  the  outbreak  of  the 
First  War,  I  gathered  together  my  students  and  took  part  in  the  War  as  the 
Commander of a militia force. I fought on the Caucasian Front and was taken prisoner 
at  Bitlis.  I  escaped  from  where  I  was  being  held  and  returned  to  Istanbul.  I  was 
appointed  a  member of the Darü’l-Hikmeti’l-Islâmiye. During the Armistice period, I 
worked  against  the  occupying  forces  with  all  my  might,  and  on  the  victory  of  the 
National  Government,  in  appreciation  I  was  summoned  by  it  to  Ankara,  where  I 
repeated my proposal to open the university in Van. 

The  life  I  had  lived  up  to  then  had  been that of a patriot. I had wanted to serve 
religion  by  means  of  politics.  But  from  then  on,  I  turned  my  back  on  the  world 
completely, and in my own words, buried the ‘Old Said’. As the ‘New Said’, devoting 
myself entirely to the hereafter, I withdrew from the world. Retiring from social life, I 
went into seclusion on the hill Yusha Tepesi in Istanbul. Later on I went to Bitlis and 
Van, in my native region, where I lived in a cave. I remained alone with the pleasures 
of my spirit and conscience. That is to say, taking as my principle “I seek refuge with 
God from the Devil and politics,” I plunged into the depths of my own spiritual world. 
Passing my time studying the Qur’an of Mighty Stature, I started to live as the ‘New 
Said.’ But the manifestations of Divine  

                                             

75 This piece was written by Ustad Bediuzzaman’s lawyers, with his permission while he was 
being held in Afyon Prison, and was sent to the government ministries mentioned. Signed, Sungur 

 

494

Determining sent me as an exile to other places. Then, getting those with me to write 
down the inspirations born in my heart from the effulgence of the Qur’an, a number of 
treatises came to be written. I gave them the name of the Risale-i Nur. This name was 
born in my conscience, for truly they were based on the light of the Qur’an. I believe 
absolutely  certainly  that  this  was  Divine  inspiration,  and  I  said  to  those  who  were 
acting  as  scribes: “Barakallah!” For it is not possible to begrudge others the light of 
belief. 

Exchanging  copies,  these  treatises  of  mine  were  written  out  by  a  number  of 
believers. I formed the opinion that they were driven on by God in order to strengthen 
the injured belief of Muslims. I understood that just as no believer could obstruct this 
Divine  prompting,  so  I  considered  it  a  religious  obligation  to  encourage  it.  Anyway 
these  treatises,  which  now  number  one  hundred  and  thirty,  consist  entirely  of 
discussions of the hereafter and belief, and contain no deliberate mention of politics or 
this  world.  Nevertheless,  they  became  the  object  of  interest  of  a  number  of 
opportunists. Investigations were carried out into them, and I was arrested and sent to 
the  prisons  of  Eskişehir, Kastamonu,  and  Denizli. Trials  were held. As a result, truth 
was  manifested  and  justice  was  executed,  but  those  opportunists  never  wearied  of 
hounding us. This time they arrested me and sent me to Afyon. I am under arrest and 
am being interrogated. They accuse me as follows: 
1) You have founded a political society. 
2) You publish ideas opposing the regime. 
3) You harbour political aims. 
The evidence for these are ten or fifteen sentences in two or three of my treatises. 
Respected Minister! As Napoleon said: “Bring me a straightforward sentence to which 
no  second  meaning  can  be  attached,  and  I’ll  have  you  executed  for  it!”  There  is  no 
sentence  uttered  by  man  which  may  not  constitute  an  offence  by  having  forced 
meanings attached to it. Especially the writings of someone like me who has reached 
seventy-five  years  of  age,  has  withdrawn  entirely from the life of this world, and has 
dedicated his life here to that of the hereafter — they will certainly be free. Being close 
to having a good intention, he will be fearless. It is unfair to study them simply in order 
to seek out offences in them. It is nothing other than unjust. Not one of any of my one 
hundred  and  thirty  treatises  comprises  any  purpose  connected  to  the  matters  of  this 
world.  Proceeding  from  the  light  of  the  Qur’an,  they  are  all  to  do with the hereafter 
and belief. In any event all the trials held up to now have come to the same conclusion 
and have resulted in acquittals. It is therefore a shame to busy the courts unnecessarily 
and take innocent believers away  

 

495

from  their  work  and  business  in  the  name  of  the  country  and  nation.  While  the  Old 
Said  spent  all  his  life  for  the  sake  of  the  happiness  of  the  country  and  nation,  how 
could the New Said be preoccupied with politics when he is seventy-five years old and 
has completely withdrawn from the world? This is your opinion too. 

I  have  only  one  aim;  it  is  this:  at  this  time  as  I  approach  the  grave,  I  hear  the 
hooting  of  the  Bolshevik  owls  in  this  country,  which  is  a  Muslim  land. The  sound is 
damaging  the  fundamentals  of  belief  of  the  Islamic  world.  Making  them  lose  their 
belief,  it  binds  the  people,  and  particularly  the  youth,  to  itself.  Struggling  against  it 
with all my strength, I am calling the youth and all Muslims to believe. I am struggling 
against these unbelieving masses. I want to enter the Divine presence with this struggle 
of mine. This is all I do. As for those who prevent me from doing this, I am frightened 
that  they  are  communists!  For  me  it  is  a sacred aim to co-operate with the forces of 
religion who have embraced  the struggle against these enemies of belief. Release me! 
Let  me  work  to  reform  the  youth,  poisoned  by  communism,  and  for  this  country’s 
faith! Let me serve Divine unity! 

                                                                                          Prisoner   
                                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
The most effective remedy for the ghastly troubles and hopelessness of the world, 
especially  at  this  time,  especially  those  smitten  by  disaster  and  the  Risale-i  Nur 
students  in  particular,  is  to  console  and  enhearten  one  another  and  strengthen  one 
another’s  morale,  and  like  true,  devoted  brothers  to  pour  balm  on  one  another’s 
sorrows  and  afflictions  and  with  true  compassion,  soothe  one  another’s  troubled 
hearts.  The  true  brotherhood  between  us which looks to the hereafter cannot sustain 
anyone  feeling  offended  or  taking  sides.  I  have  placed  all  my  trust  in  you  and  am 
counting  on  you,  and  you  know  that  I  have  decided to sacrifice happily not only my 
comfort, self-respect, and honour for you, but also my very spirit, and indeed, you can 
see  this.  I  swear  even  that  the  torment  caused  these  last  eight  days  by  the  trifling 
incident  of  two  leading  Risale-i  Nur students apparently avoiding and upsetting each 
other  instead  of  consoling  each  other, has caused my  spirit, heart, and mind to weep 
and cry out: “Alas! Alas! Mercy! Succour us O Most Merciful of the Merciful!  

 

496

Preserve  us  and  save  us  from  the  evil  of  satans  from  among  jinn  and  men.  Fill  my 
brothers’ hearts with loyalty, love, and fraternal feelings for each other!” 

My  brothers,  as  unyielding  as  steel!  You  help  me.  Our  situation  is  extremely 
sensitive.  I  relied  on  you  to  such  an  extent  that  I  handed  over  all  my  duties  to  your 
collective personality. So for your part, you should help me immediately. For sure, the 
incident  was  trifling,  temporary,  and  unimportant,  but  even  a  hair,  a  mote,  on  the 
mainspring  of our clock or the pupil of our eye causes pain. This point must be very 
important,  for  three  physical  explosions  and  three  non-physical  observations  gave 
news of it exactly. 

                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
My  stove  and  the  two  drinking-cups  of  the  Feyzi’s,  Sabri,  and  Husrev 
disintegrating foretold a terrible calamity. It is absolutely essential that we practise true 
solidarity and disregard one another’s faults, our most powerful point of support, and 
never take offence at a hero of the Risale-i Nur like Husrev, since he takes my place 
and is an important representative of the Risale-i Nur’s collective personality. The last 
few days I felt a terrible distress and despair, and said to myself in alarm: “Our enemies 
have found a way to defeat us.” Both my stove and the absolutely correct observation 
I  made  in  my  imagination  gave  correct  news.  Beware!  Beware!  Beware!  Quickly 
repair your solidarity, which up to now has been as strong as steel. There is a strong 
possibility  this  incident  will  cause  more  harm  —especially  at  this  juncture—  to  our 
service of the Qur’an and belief than our being sent to prison. 

                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
The night of the Prophet’s (PBUH) Ascension is the equivalent of a second Night 
of  Power.  Working  this  night  as  much  as  one  possibly  can  causes  a  thousandfold 
increase in spiritual gains. In accordance with the mystery of spiritual partnership, on 
this valuable night, God willing, like  

 

497

some angels who glorify God with forty thousand tongues, you will perform worship 
and  supplications  with  forty  thousand  tongues.  This  will  yield  much  reward  in  this 
place of tribulation, and you will be offering thanks through your worship tonight for 
the  coming  storm  involving  us  being  reduced  a  thousandfold.  Together  with 
congratulating  you  for  your  perfect  caution  and  prudence, I give you the good news 
that dominical grace is being manifested most clearly for us. 

                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly:  I  congratulate  you  with  all  my  heart  and  soul  for  the  Night  of  the 

Ascension. 

Secondly:  It  has  been  our  claim  for  twenty  years  that  as  far  as  it  is possible  the 
Risale-i Nur students do not disturb public order. As a Divine favour, and as a wonder 
resulting  from  your  loyalty  and  sincerity,  the  harm  of  our  imprisonment  has  been 
reduced  a  hundredfold.  For  there  was  a  strong  possibility  that  those  who  attack  us 
could have taken it as a sign supporting their main claim that we disturb public order 
and  breach  security  and  made  it  a  pretext  for  refuting  our  case.  The  mountain  was 
made  into  a  molehill.  Otherwise  those  who  makes  mountains  out  of  molehills 
concerning  us  could  have  taken  advantage  of  it  and  induced  many  people  to  believe 
their slanders against us. 

Thirdly: Do not worry about me. My being in the same building as you reduces all 
my  difficulties  and  distress  to  nothing.  In  fact,  our  being  gathered  together  here  is 
important  in  numerous  respects,  and  it  is  in  many  ways  beneficial  for  our  service  of 
belief.  Indeed,  since  a  number  of  significant  facts  in  the  supplement  to  my  written 
objections  have  been  sent  to  the  six  departments  of  government,  and  have  come  to 
their  attention  and  influenced  them  to  an  extent,  it  has  reduced  all  our  troubles  to 
nothing. 

Fourthly: Busying oneself with the Risale-i Nur both dispels distress, and may be 

counted as five sorts of worship. 

Fifthly:  The  previous  misfortune  was  lessened  a  hundredfold  through  the 
teachings  of  the  Risale-i  Nur.  Otherwise,  because  of  the  sensitivity  of  the  time  and 
place,  that  single  molehill  would  have  become  mountains,  like  putting  a  match  to 
gunpowder. In fact, some officials said: “Those who listen to the lessons of the Risale-
i Nur were not involved.” If only everyone had listened to its teachings, nothing would 
have happened. As  

 

498

far as you can, don’t allow things to escalate; don’t let anything else be added to the 
difficulties  of prison. Like the Nurjus, the other prisoners should  be brothers and not 
be angry at each other. 

                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i  

My Dear, Loyal, Sincere Brothers! 
It has become obligatory for us to practise as far as we can within the bounds of 
possibility  the  principles  of  the  Treatise  On  Sincerity  and  sincerity  in  its  true  sense 
among ourselves and towards one another. I have received certain information that for 
the past three months three men have been posted here to distance my ‘special’ (has) 
brothers from one another by playing on differences in ideas or temperament. They are 
also  drawing  out  the  court  proceedings  in  order  to make  the  resolute  Nurjus  fed  up 
and to shake them, and to make the sensitive and irresolute one’s suspicious and cause 
them to give up their service of the Risale-i Nur. Beware! Beware! Don’t let the self-
sacrificing brotherhood and genuine love you have maintained up to now be shaken. If 
they are shaken only a jot, it will cause us great harm. For only a small jolt in Denizli 
caused  hojas  like...  to  keep  their  distance.  Our  service  of  the  Qur’an  and  belief 
necessitates that if necessary we sacrifice our very souls for one another; true devotees 
do  not  become  vexed  with  one  another  because  of  difficulties  or  irritability  arising 
from  other  things;  with  perfect  humility,  modesty,  and  resignation,  they  attribute  the 
faults  to  themselves,  and  try  to  increase  their  love  and  sincerity. Otherwise it will be 
blown  up out of all proportion, possibly causing irreparable harm. Leaving it to your 
perspicacity, I cut this short here. 

                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
In  consequence  of  an  important  warning  I  received,  there  are  now  one  or  two 
tasks  connected  with  the  Risale-i  Nur,  which  are  to  try  with all your might, through 
the  lessons  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  not  to  fall  into  dispute  or  take  up  biased  sides  in 
among  the  other  unfortunate  prisoners  in  this  third  School  of  Joseph.  For  there  are 
terrible  troublemakers  who  are  concealed  and  attempting  to  take  advantage  of 
differences,  grudges,  hatred,  and  obstinacy.  Since  if  necessary  the  majority  of  our 
fellow-prisoners manifest a vein of heroism which makes them ready to sacrifice their 
lives for their country, nation, and friends, surely those brave men should sacrfice  

 

499

for  the good of the nation and peace and quiet here in prison their obstinacy, hatred, 
and enmity, which are entirely without benefit and extremely damaging in these stormy 
times.  For  in  this  way  they  may  be  saved  from  the  corruption  of  those  who  are 
covertly  inculcating  communism,  which  turns  into  anarchy.  It  may  otherwise  lead  to 
significant difficulties and upsets at this time, like putting a match to gunpowder, both 
for a hundred wretched prisoners, and for the innocent Risale-i Nur students, and for 
the  town  of Afyon. It might also lead to the intervention of a secret society which is 
here but whose roots are abroad. Since Divine Determining sent us here for their sake, 
and because of their happiness and ease of mind some of us do not want to leave and 
we  sacrifice  our  comfort  for  them and  endure  every  hardship patiently, certainly it is 
absolutely  essential  that  for  the  sake  of  those  new  brothers  of  ours,  like  the  Denizli 
prisoners,  and  out  of  respect  for  the  months  of  Sha‘ban  and  Ramadan,  we  do  not 
become  angry  with  one  another  and make peace like brothers. In any case, we and I 
consider them to be within the circle of Risale-i Nur students and include them in our 
prayers. 

                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly: In accordance with the meaning of “Good lies in what God wishes,” there 
are  many  instances  of  good  in our trial being delayed and those of our brothers who 
have been released being here on the day it recommences. 

Yes,  since  the  Risale-i  Nur  question  is  of  importance  for  the  Islamic  world  in 
general and this country in particular, there should be lively gatherings such as that in 
order to attract everyone’s attention to its truths. For in its glittering fashion, beyond 
all our hopes and precautions, and our concealing it, and our enemies belittling it, and 
outside our wills, the Risale-i Nur teaches its truths openly to friend and foe alike. It 
unhesitatingly divulges its most private secrets to the most distant stranger. Since the 
truth  is  this,  we  should  consider  our  trifling  difficulties  to  be  a  bitter  medicine  like 
quinine, and offering thanks in patience, say: “This too will pass, God willing.” 

Secondly: I wrote this to the supervisor of this School of Joseph: just as when I 

was a prisoner-of-war in Russia, the Bolshevik storm first  

 

500

erupted in the prisons, so the French Revolution first began in the prisons and with the 
prisoners known in the histories as “vagabonds.” Because of this, in both Eskişehir and 
Denizli  we  Risale-i  Nur  students  tried  to  reform  the  other  prisoners  as  far  as  we 
possibly could. In both prisons it was extremely successful. Here it will be even more 
useful, for as a result of the Risale-i Nur’s instuction at this sensitive time, the squall76 
that blew up was only a hundredth of what it would have been. Otherwise the harmful 
outside  currents  which  take  advantage  of  conflict  and such incidents, and await such 
opportunities, would have ignited the gunpowder and caused a conflagration. 

                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My  Dear,  Loyal,  Unshakeable  Brothers,  who  do  not  become  dispirited  at 

difficulties and abandon us! 

Due  to  some  physical  and  spiritual  tribulation,  my  evil-commanding  soul  was 
feeling sad on your account when this was imparted to  me: if you had suffered these 
difficulties ten times over in order to meet with all your brothers here at close quarters 
it still would have been cheap. It appears necessary that like in former times the people 
of reality used to gather together and meet at least once or twice a year, the Risale-i 
Nur students gather together every few years in the School of Joseph. In keeping with 
the  God-fearing  and  ascetic  way  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  its  teaching  those  most  in 
need,  everyone,  even  those  who  oppose  it,  and  to  allow  its  collective  personality  to 
speak,  if  it  entails  a  thousand  difficulties  and  tribulations,  it  is  of  no  importance 
whatsoever. A few of our weak brothers becoming fed up in our previous prisons and 
leaving the circle of the Risale-i Nur caused immeasurable loss to them but no harm to 
the Risale-i Nur. More resolute and sincere students appeared in their stead. Since the 
trials  of  this  world  are  transient  and  pass  swiftly,  leaving  us  their  fruits and rewards, 
we should trust in Divine grace and offer thanks in patience. 

                                                                        S a i d  N u r s i  

                                             

involved. 

76 The squall was a revolt that broke out in the prison, but none of the Risale-i Nur students was 

 

501

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly: Send the last two pages, in either the old letters or written by typewriter, 
unofficially  to  the  Chairman  of the Court by means of someone serious you consider 
suitable.  When you do so, give him also  the following note, written separately: “Said 
thanks  you  and  says:  ‘They’ve  unnailed  the  windows,  but  the  prosecutor  does  not 
permit  any  of  my  brothers  or  those  who  attend  me  to  come  to  me.  And  he  requests 
that you give him his precious, miraculous Qur’an, which is in the court, so that he can 
read  it  during these blessed months. He sent three juz’77 of that wondrous Qur’an to 
the  Directorate  of  Religious  Affairs  as  samples  so  that  they  could  print  it 
photographically. Besides that, he requests one of the Risale-i Nur collections which is 
in  the  court  so  that  he  can  read  it  in  his  loneliness,  solitary  confinement  and  severe 
distress, and it can comfort him and be a companion. In any event, three or four courts 
of law have seen those collections and not objected to them. Similarly, they have been 
much  appreciated  and  praised  by  the  leading  scholars  of  Mecca,  Medina,  Damascus, 
Aleppo,  and  the  university  of  al-Azhar  in  Cairo,  and  none  of  them  has  criticized  or 
objected to them.’” 

                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Feyzi has two copies of the Hizb al-Nuri78 with him. If he is not in need of them, 
let one of them be sent to me, or let Mehmed Feyzi write out another copy. Also, the 
Treatise On Ramadan and the printed Supreme Sign (Âyetü’l-Kübra) are needed here. 
Quickly reduce the tension between you and repair the damage. Beware! Beware! The 
slightest deviation causes enormous harm to the Risale-i Nur circle. Don’t get carried 
away by feelings arising from the difficulties. My stove exploding was an indication of 
this calamity. 

                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i  

                                             

77 A juz’ is a thirtieth part of the Qur’an. [Tr.] 
78 Hizb al-Nuri: A forty-five-page Arabic piece which Bediuzzaman described as “manifesting 
the meaning of the Hadith ‘An hour’s reflective thought may be better than a year’s [supererogatory] 
worship,’ a luminous proof of the Risale-i Nur, a supreme invocation springing from it, and a small 
sample of it.” [Tr.] 

 

502

My Dear, Loyal Brothers Husrev, Mehmed Feyzi, and Sabri! 
Trusting  in  you  with  all  my  strength,  I  was  expecting  to  enter  the  grave  with 
peace of mind and to leave to you the welfare of the Risale-i Nur. I was certain that 
nothing at all could part you from each other. Now there is an official communication 
concerning  ghastly  plans  to  create  differences  between  the  leading  Risale-i  Nur 
students.  Since,  as  necessitated  by  the  strength  of  your  loyalty  and  your  intense 
concern  for  the  Risale-i  Nur,  you  are  ready  to  sacrifice  your  lives  for  one another if 
necessary,  certainly  you  are bound to sacrifice your extremely  trivial, temporary, and 
unimportant  feelings.  It  will  otherwise  cause  untold  harm  at  this  juncture,  and  I 
tremble  at  the  possibility  of  anyone leaving the Risale-i Nur circle. For the last three 
days  I  have again been shaken by distress such as I  have never before experienced. I 
have now understood certainly that petulance as slight as a hair on the eye on the part 
of  those  like  yourselves  has  the  effect  of  a  bombshell  on  our  lives  with  the  Risale-i 
Nur. I’ll tell you this even, much effort was made during that storm [revolt] to connect 
us  with  it.  Now  they  are  trying  to  distance  you  from  one  another.  Although  I  have 
suffered ten times more than you for your sake, I have decided not to see the faults of 
any  of  you.  I  ask  of  you  in  the  name  of  our  master,  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  collective 
personality,  not  to  insist  on  your  own  way,  whether  justified  or  not.  If  in  that 
extraordinary place hidden fingers are stirring things up with your being together, one 
of you move to Tahiri’s ward. 

                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Please do not be offended at the great importance I have given to the three of you 
being annoyed at each other. For like me, Husrev and Feyzi are somewhat unsociable 
and  reserved.  They  also  differ  from  each  other  in  temperament.  As  for  Sabri,  he  is 
involved in the life of society through his relatives and manner of his livelihood, and is 
obliged to be cautious. Since, due to these differences of ways and temperaments, the 
three of you have  probably been unable to maintain your patience and forbearance in 
the uproar of the ward and its noisy crowd, I become alarmed and suspicious. For only 
slight opposition at present causes much harm. 

                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i 

 

503

My Dear, Loyal Brothers and Fellow-Students in this School of Joseph! 
The holy Night of Acquittal (Bera’at), tonight, is like a sacred seed of the whole 
year  and  the  programme  of  human  destiny,  and  is  therefore  as  holy  as  the  Night  of 
Power. Just as all good works on the Night of Power yield thirty thousand merits, so 
on this Night of Acquittal the merits of such acts and for each letter of the Qur’an rise 
to twenty thousand. If at other times such merits are ten, during the three months [of 
Rajab, Sha‘ban, and Ramadan] they rise to a hundred or a thousand. Then on the well-
known holy nights, they rise to tens of thousands or twenty or thirty thousand. These 
nights  may  be  the  equivalent  of  fifty  years  of  worship.  It  is  highly  profitable  to  be 
occupied  as  far  as  one  can with the Qur’an, seeking Divine forgiveness, and uttering 
prayers for the Prophet (PBUH).  

                                                                                  S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

May the peace of God be upon you, and His mercy and blessings! 
I  congratulate  you  with  all  my  heart  and  soul  for  the  Night  of  Acquittal,  which 
may  gain  for  the  believers  the  equivalent  of  fifty  years  of  worship.  I  await  with 
complete certainty from Divine mercy that through the mystery of spiritual partnership 
and  the  effulgence  of  solidarity,  like  some  angels  who  utter  glorifications  with  forty 
thousand tongues, all the purely sincere Risale-i Nur students will be performing their 
worship and seeking forgiveness as though with forty thousand tongues. 
                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

Firstly:  At  the  suggestion  of  some  hojas  who  support  the  innovations,  the 
indictment has objected to a matter in the Fifth Ray, as though it does not accept the 
coming of the Islamic Antichrist (Dajjal), and numerous other Antichrists. An answer 
to this is the sound Hadith, a brilliant and certain miracle of the Prophet (PBUH): “The 
caliphate  will  continue  with  the  sons  of  my  uncle  ‘Abbas  until  it  passes  into  the 
destructive hand of the Antichrist.”79 That is, the ‘Abbasid caliphate will continue for 
the  

                                             

79 Musnad al-Firdaws, iii, 447; al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, xiv, 271, No: 33436; Suyuti, Ta’rikh 

al-Hulafa’, 6, 16; Majma’u’l-Zawa’id, v, 187; Cam’u’l-Fawa’id, i, 849. 

 

504

lengthy  period  of  five  hundred  years,  then  it  will  be  wiped  out  by  one  of  the  three 
Antichrists, known as Jenghiz and Hulagu, then he will treacherously rule within Islam. 
That  is,  as  is  indicated  by  numerous  Hadiths,  there  is  clear  evidence  that  three 
Antichrists will appear in the Islamic world. The predictions made by the above Hadith 
are two clear miracles. 

The First is that the ‘Abbasid Caliphate, which was to come into existence, would 

continue for five hundred years. 

The Second was that it would come to an end at the cruel, destructive hand of an 
Antichrist called Jenghiz and Hulagu. Is it at all possible that the Owner of the Shari‘a, 
who in the books of Hadith foretold even the most minor things related to the Qur’an 
and  marks  of  Islam,  should  not  have  foretold  the  extraordinary  events  of  our  times? 
And is it at all possible that there should be no allusions to the Risale-i Nur students, 
who  steadfastly  serve  the  Qur’an  in  the  midst  of  those  strange  events,  in  the  widest 
sphere and under the severest conditions, and the fruits of whose service are affirmed 
by friend and foe alike? 

                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

And they were covered by humiliation and misery.80 

[One fine point about this verse] 

My Dear Brother Re’fet Bey, Commander of the Risale-i Nur and Servant of the 

Qur’an! 

The Jewish nation has always been excessive in its love of life and this world, and 
has  therefore  deserved  the  blows  of  abasement  and  misery  it  has  received  every 
century. However, in the Palestine question it is not love of life and this world, but a 
significant sort of national and religious feeling because Palestine is where the prophets 
of  the  Children  of  Israel  are  buried,  and  the  prophets  belonged  to  their  nation.  In 
consequence they have received no swift blows. A small group could never otherwise 
have  held  out  in  the  midst  of  the  vast  Arab  lands;  it  would  quickly  have  been 
humiliated. 

                                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i 

                                             

80 Qur’an, 2:61. 

 

505

Q u e s t i o n : Is there any verse stating that the earth is round, and if so, which 
Sura is it in? I am hesitant as to whether it is flat or round. All countries are situated in 
lands  surrounded  by  sea.  What  is  there  to  keep  in  the  outer  edges  of  these  seas?  I 
request that you provide an explanation, and I kiss your hands. 

                                                                                Emirdağlı Ali Hoca 

The  Risale-i  Nur  has  solved  questions  of  this  sort.  The  Islamic  scholars  have 
accepted  that  the  earth  is  round,  and  this  in  no  way  contradicts  religion.  The  word 
‘sath’ in the verse81 does not indicate that the earth is not round. It has been laid down 
by  the  learned  authorities  that  to  be  turned  towards  the  qibla  (istikbal-i  kible)  while 
performing the prayers is obligatory, and this is applicable to every part of the prayers, 
including  the  bowing  and  prostrating.  Since  according  to  the  Shari‘a,  there  is  a 
luminous line from the Ka‘ba upwards as far as the Divine Throne, and downwards to 
the  ground,  performing  all  the  actions  of  the  prayers  in  the  direction  of  the  qibla  is 
possible with the earth being round. 

                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.82 

May God’s peace and mercy be upon you, and His blessings, for ever and ever 
My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
I congratulate you with all my heart and soul on the blessed month of Ramadan. 
May Almighty God make the Night of Power the equivalent of a thousand months for 
all of you, and accept it as an eighty-year lifetime of worship. Amen. 

Secondly:  I  am  of  the  opinion  that there  are  numerous  benefits  and  instances  of 
good in our remaining here until the Festival. If we were to be released now, we would 
both  lose  out  on  all  the  good  of  this  School  of  Joseph,  and  spoil  Ramadan,  which 
looks  purely  to  the  hereafter,  and  taint  our  spiritual  states  with  worldly  activities.  In 
accordance with “good lies in what God wishes,” we shall find great joy in this, God 
willing. 

You have also understood in the court that since they can in no way  

                                             

81 See, Qur’an, 88:20. 
82 Qur’an, 17:44. 

 

506

convict us with their laws, they discuss trifling things of no importance like some petty 
matters in some petty letters which have less connection with the law than a fly’s wing. 
For they have found no way to attack the significant, universal matters of the Risale-i 
Nur. Also  their slandering my person so as to deprive it of importance  instead of the 
widespread, general Risale-i Nur and its students is very advantageous for us; Divine 
Determining  does  not  allow  them  to  interfere  with  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  its  students, 
and preoccupies them with myself. So I say to you and to all my friends: for the well-
being  of  you  and  the  Risale-i  Nur,  I  accept  wholeheartedly,  even  with  my  evil-
commanding soul’s agreement, and with joy and gratitude, all the difficulties inflicted 
on  my  person.  Just  as  Paradise  is  not  inexpensive,  so  Hell  is  not  unnecessary.  The 
world and its tribulations are transitory and fleeting. Also, since we shall be avenged a 
hundred  times  over  at  the  Last  Judgement,  and  in  part  in  this  world,  for  the  ill-
treatment we receive at the hands of our covert enemies, we should feel sorry for them 
rather than angry. 

Since the reality is this, it is truly good fortune to submit without alarm, and with 
caution, and perfect patience and thanks, to whatever Divine Determining has decreed 
for  us  and  to  trust  in  Divine  grace,  which  protects  us,  and  with  truly  sincere, 
consoling, and heartfelt friendliness and love for our brothers here, together with them 
busy ourselves with our supplications, which in Ramadan yield a thousandfold reward; 
and  with  our  study  and  reading,  try  not  to  give  importance  to  these  minor  passing 
hardships.  The  Risale-i  Nur’s  giving  instruction  in  this  most  important  examination 
and trial, and its making its enemies read it, is a significant victory for it.83 

                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise. 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly:  It  is  stated  in  sound narrations: “Seek the Night of Power in the second 
half of Ramadan, especially in the last ten days.”84 It is therefore a great happiness to 
try to profit from the Night of Power, which may  

                                             

83 It is certainly bad that some of our brothers are unnecessarily denying that they are students of 

the Risale-i Nur, especially .... , and that they are concealing their considerable past services. But 
because of that service we should forgive them and not feel angry at them. 

84 Bukhari, Fadl Laylat al-Qadr, 2, 3; Tahajjud, 21; Muslim, Siyam, 207-19. 

 

507

gain for a person an eighty-year lifetime of worship, and which is probably among the 
coming nights. 

Secondly: According to the meaning of “Whoever believes in Divine Determining 

is saved from grief and sorrow,” and “Look on the good side of things,” and, 

Those who listen to the Word and follow the best [meaning] in it; those are 
the  ones  whom  God  has  guided,  and  those  are  the  ones  endued  with 
understanding,85 

we  should  now  look  on  the  good  side  of  everything,  the  aspect  that  affords  ease  of 
mind,  so  that  meaningless,  unnecessary,  harmful,  ugly,  distressing,  temporary 
circumstances  do  not  hold  our  attention  and  preoccupy  our  minds.  In  the  Eighth 
Word, one man entered a garden while another left it. The fortunate man looked at the 
flowers and beautiful things, and relaxed and enjoyed himself. But the unfortunate one 
looked only at the dirty, ugly things, although he was unable to clean them up, so he 
was nauseated and upset instead of resting, and then went on his way. Now, the stages 
of  man’s  social  life,  and  especially  the  School  of  Joseph,  resembles  a  garden.  It 
contains both ugly and beautiful things, and distressing and happy things. The sensible 
person  is  he  who  busies  himself  with  the  beautiful,  happiness-inducing  things,  and 
ignores  the  ugly,  distressing  things,  and  offers  thanks  happily  instead  of  complaining 
querulously. 

                                                                                  S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly:  There  is  a  strong possibility  that  tomorrow  night  is the Night of Power. 
Some of the scholarly authorities stated it is tomorrow. Even if it is not in fact, since 
the Umma consider it to be so, God willing it will be accepted as such. 

Secondly:  I  am  anxious  about  the  comfort  of  our  brothers  in  Ward  Six,  where 
there was a disturbance. There  is a finger from outside which stirs up the prison, and 
particularly Ward Six. Our brothers there should be careful and cautious, and not get 
mixed up in anything. 

Thirdly: Have you sent the piece to the lawyer, to have it read to the Chairman of 
the Court? Also, because it is the same matter, Halil Hilmi is not only Sabri’s lawyer, 
but  everyone’s. That is how  I look on him. He should now assist  our first lawyer on 
account of all of us. 

                                             

85 Qur’an, 39:18. 

 

508

Fourthly: I gave Tasköprülü Sadik Bey’s introduction to Sabri to write out. If it 
has already been written out, the part that has been corrected should be sent to him. A 
newly  written-out  copy  should  be  sent  to  me.  I  have  a  copy  of  Sadik’s  short  poem 
here. If you do not have a copy, I shall send it to you. 

                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly: I send congratulations both for your Festival, and for that of your fellow-
prisoners. I consider those who exchange greetings with you to have greeted me. It is 
as though I have made the Festival visits on all of them; you should know this and you 
should tell them. 

Secondly: Due to the warning of my cast-iron stove disintegrating without reason, 
and  our  acting  with  complete  caution  and  self-restraint  in  consequence,  the  force  of 
that ‘squall’ was reduced a hundredfold and the gunpowder did not ignite. Now again 
my water-flask disintegrating extraordinarily without reason informs us that we should 
again  behave  with  perfect  self-composure,  patience,  and  caution.  It  was  imparted  to 
me  that  covert  dissemblers  want  to  employ  depraved  profligates  and  apostacizing 
communists  against  the  religiously-minded  people;  they  are  even  trying  to  interfere 
here.86 

* * * 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal, and Unshakeable Brothers! 
I congratulate you with all my heart at your quickly healing that wound of ours. I 
felt completely easy last night as a result. In fact, the Medresetü’z-Zehrais expanding, 
and the true sincerity, self-sacrifice and abandoning of egotism, and complete humility 
of  the  Risale-i  Nur  circle  are  being  adopted  and  are  spreading.  Certainly,  very  petty 
and temporary sensitivity, irritability, and petulance cannot spoil its powerful teachings 
and the bonds of brotherhood. The Treatise On Sincerity is the best  

                                             

86 Yesterday I felt happy and joyful. Then I realized that my brother in Nurs had eight months 

previously sent some Nurs honey in a flask to me in Emirdag. Yesterday it arrived here from 
Emirdag. I told them to quickly bring it to me. I waited, but it was not brought. My happiness 
suddenly turned into anger. It was the cause of that flask with the honey, which in my eyes was a 
hundred times more precious than the flask, being given to a stranger and sent to the market, and 
then the flask suddenly broke. I have sent an amount of that sweet honey, a gift from the village of 
Nurs, my birthplace, so that all my brothers may have a taste of it as a ‘Festival sweet.’ 

 

509

advice  on  this  point.  Their  worst  strategy  now  in  striking  at  us  and  the  Risale-i Nur 
and  agitating  us,  is  to  make  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  look  coldly  on  each  other  by 
playing on differences in their ideas and temperaments, and to separate them from each 
other. For sure, it was only a minor tiff, but only a hair on the eye causes as much pain 
as a stone, so that my flask gave news of it as though it was a major incident. The late 
Hafiz Ali (May God be pleased with him) complaining shortly before his death about a 
very  minor  such  situation  has  come  to  mind  perhaps  a  hundred  times, and  saddened 
me. 

                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
I  gave  the  students’  written  objections  to  the  prison  governor.  I  told  him:  “We 
want  to  send  this,  together  with  the  end  part  of  my  written  objections,  to  the 
Directorate  of  Religious  Affairs  and  Ankara  Criminal  Court,  which  acquitted  us  and 
our treatises, and if it’s appropriate, to send too the list of errors and corrections, but 
privately and just for the information.” He said: “It is appropriate.” Now you may ask 
the lawyer to prepare several copies of the students’ written objections and two copies 
of the list. 

Also,  write  to  the  Directorate  of  Religious  Affairs  and  say:  since  you  wrote 
perfectly  correctly  in  the  report  about  Said  and  his  friends  you  sent  Afyon  this  time 
that  it  is  your  duty  to  defend  scholars  of  religion,  both  the  oppressed  Said  and  his 
innocent companions are extremely grateful to your department. Anyway, our case is 
related  to  religion  and  learning,  so  the  Department  of  Religious  Affairs  should  be 
concerned with it before the police, judiciary, or any other department. For this reason, 
both  in  Denizli  and  Afyon,  we  applied  firstly  to  your  department,  sending  our 
complaints to the scholars there. Write a paragraph expressing this meaning. 

                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brother, Re’fet Bey! 
Out of respect for the Qur’an of Mighty Stature, and for the sake of your relations 
with  the  Qur’an,  and  in  honour of your twenty years of service to belief through the 
Risale-i Nur, quickly put an end to this apparently small, but because of the sensitivity 
of  our  situation,  terrible  and  grievous  quarrel  between  you.  For  it  greatly  assists the 
covert dissemblers  

 

510

who  are  trying  to  destroy  us,  and  is  like  putting  a  match  to  gunpowder.  There  is 
otherwise a strong possibility that because of an ounce of personal rights tons of harm 
will come to us and our service of the Qur’an and belief. I swear that if one of you was 
to insult me most terribly and entirely trample my honour but not give up serving the 
Qur’an, belief, and the Risale-i Nur, I would forgive him and make peace with him and 
try  not  to  be  offended.  You  know  that  our  enemies  try  to  take  advantage  of  the 
slightest  unmannerliness,  so  make  it  up  quickly.  Stop  being  petulant,  which  is 
meaningless  and  so  harmful.  Otherwise,  like  Shemsi,  Shefik,  and  Tevfik,  some  of  us 
will  apparently  join  those  who  oppose  us,  causing  great  harm  and  deficiency  to  our 
service  of  belief.  Up  to  now  Divine  favour  has  made up for any losses by  bestowing 
numerous others who work on the same system. God willing, it will again come to our 
aid. 

                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
The  governor  evidently  very  much  liked  The  Supreme  Sign  and  A  Guide  For 
Youth. Now he wants The Staff of Moses (Asâ-yi Musa) and Zülfikâr. I told him that I 
would bring them to him. If there are copies of them here in Afyon, set aside one each 
of  The  Staff  of  Moses,  Zülfikâr  (bound,  large  size),  A  Guide  For  Youth,  and  The 
Supreme Sign. 

                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly:  This  report  has  had  exactly  the  same  result  as  the  one  in  Denizli.  They 
have  exonerated  us  on  the  points  on  which  we  have  been  charged,  but  in  order  to 
ingratiate themselves with them and show that they are not Nurjus, and due to a vein 
of  Wahhabism,  they  have  attacked  us  with  a  few  scholarly  criticisms.  I  reckon  this 
report  arrived  before  the  indictment  was  written,  for  the  indictment  includes  some 
points  from  it.  In  which  case  our  list  of  errors  and  corrections  answers  them 
completely. What do you think of this? Also, what are my new replies like? Are they 
apt? I wrote them very hastily when in a wretched state. 

Secondly: Up to now they were apparently preoccupied with our  

 

511

persons,  and  the  questions  of  a  political  society,  a  sufi order, and a few unimportant 
private letters. But now, with seizing The Illuminating Lamp (Siracü’n-Nûr) and The 
Six  Attacks  (Hücumat-i  Sitte),  and  the  experts’  committee  directing  attention  to  the 
Risale-i  Nur,  and  the  machinations  of  our  covert  enemies,  the  Risale-i Nur has been 
attacked in a sort of way, which is a means of ensuring tranquillity in this country. So 
as  with  many  times  previously,  at  exactly  the  same  time  as  the  country  was  being 
attacked  in  this  way,  two  severe  earthquakes  occurred,  just  as  I  was  writing  that 
discussion. This affirmed  me, saying: “There is no need to write it.” So I did not write 
any  more.  Then  today  I  heard  that  there  is  fear  of  war.  So  I  said  to  the  person  in 
charge here: “Whenever the Risale-i Nur is attacked, the earth either becomes angry, 
or  there  is  fear  of  war.  We  have  experienced  numerous  such  events  so  that  no 
possibility of chance remained, and these have been pointed out to the courts.” That is 
to say, my terrible anxiety about the Risale-i Nur recently, and the jealous criticisms of 
the experts’ committee, and the confiscation of an important part of the Risale-i Nur, 
although  I  did  not  realize  it,  coincided  with  The  Illuminating  Lamp  —which  is  like 
acceptable alms-giving and a means of repelling disaster— disappearing behind the veil 
of concealment, the earthquake, and fear of the outbreak of war. 

                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Do  not worry, we are under Divine protection. There are numerous instances of 
mercy  interspersed  among  the  outward  difficulties.  The  experts’  committee  was 
obliged to object to one piece, but certainly they have become Nurju’s at heart. 

                                                                      S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My  Dear,  Loyal,  Unshakeable,  Undismayed  Brothers,  who  would  never  give  up 

working for the hereafter for this fleeting world! 

Don’t  be  upset  at  remaining  here  a  little  longer  and  their  wanting  to  extend  our 
case  somewhat.  On  the  contrary,  be  pleased,  like  me.  For  since  life  never  stops  and 
rushes to extinction, in places of tribulation  

 

512

such as this it becomes eternal through the fruits its yields for the hereafter. Moreover, 
the  circle  the  Risale-i  Nur  teaches  is  expanding.  For  example,  the  scholars  of  the 
experts’  committee  are  being  obliged  to  study  The  Illuminating  Light  with  close 
attention. Also, it is possible that if we were released now, it would cause deficiencies 
in  our  work  for  the  cause  of  belief  in  one  or  two  respects.  Although  the  distress  I 
suffer  far  exceeds  yours,  I  do  not  want  to  be  released.  So  as  far  as  you  can,  try  to 
endure it patiently and become accustomed to this sort of life, and to find solace and 
ease of mind by writing out the Risale-i Nur and reading it. 

                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly:  If  necessary,  I  can  send  you  two  copies  of  the  list  of  errors  and 
corrections  from  the  end  of  the  defences,  which  I  have here in the new letters. They 
are  to  be  sent  to  the  Directorate  of  Religious  Affairs  in  addition  to  the  reply  to  the 
experts’  committee,  and  to  the  Ankara  Criminal  Court.  A  copy  of  the  reply  to  the 
experts’ committee should also be given to the court here. 

Second: It’s good that they have expanded our case. Up to now they had made it 
appear minor and unimportant in order to devalue it, but secretly were giving it much 
importance. The situation now will be more advantageous for our work in the way of 
belief and the Qur’an, God willing. 

                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly: If it had been free this year perhaps some of us would have made the Hajj. 
God  willing,  our  intention  will  be  accepted  as  though  we  had  made  it,  and  in  these 
distressing  conditions  our  service  of  belief  and  the  Risale-i  Nur  will  yield  the  high 
reward of the Hajj. 

Secondly: Since we have repeatedly said that “the Risale-i Nur is a powerful and 
true  Qur’anic  commentary,” it was imparted to me that I should explain a fact, since 
some inattentive people do not know the full meaning of this. The fact is this: 

 

513

There are two sorts of Qur’anic commentaries: 
The  first  is  the  well-known  sort  of  commentary.  Commentaries  of  this  sort 

expound and elucidate the Qur’an’s phraseology, words, and sentences. 

The  second  sort  explain,  prove,  and  elucidate  with  powerful  arguments  the 
Qur’an’s truths related to  belief. This sort has great importance. Sometimes the well-
known, externalist commentaries include this sort in summary fashion. But the Risale-i 
Nur  has  made  it  its  basis  directly,  and  is  a  commentary  on  the  Qur’an’s  meanings 
which silences obstinate philosophers in unprecedented manner. 

Thirdly: This morning I was going to write something, but did not. Now the same 
matter  has  come  up,  and  the  clerk  Sâlim  Bey  gave  permission.  Husrev  and  Tahiri 
should come tomorrow in order to write a petition to the Cabinet. 

                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Is  it  us  and  the  Risale-i  Nur  who  are  the  most harmful things around so that all 
other writers are free to write and all classes of people are free to meet together? But 
without religious education, Muslims cannot be governed except by means of absolute 
despotism  and  absolute  bribery.  For  just  as  up  to  the  present  no  Muslim  has  ever 
become  a  true  Christian  or  Jew,  they  rather  become  irreligious  and  completely 
corrupted;  so  a  Muslim  cannot  become  a  communist;  he  turns  into  an  anarchist  and 
can be governed by nothing other than absolute despotism. We Risale-i Nur students 
are working both for government, and public order, and the happiness of the country 
and nation. Those opposed to us are irreligious anarchists and enemies of the country 
and nation. It is essential that the Government should not interfere with us, but protect 
and assist us. 

                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i 

 

514

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly:  Their  releasing  publishers  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  like  Re’fet,  Edhem,  the 
Çalışkan’s, and Burhan shows that it is not forbidden to disseminate the Risale-i Nur 
and  the  court  does  not  intervene.  It  is  also a sign that it has decided that there is no 
political  society.  Also,  since  in  prolonging  our  case  it  has  attracted  widespread 
attention to the Risale-i Nur, and is like a general invitation to  read it and an official 
advertisement, and it has excited the desire of the needy to study it, it has been led to 
benefits for us and the believers far surpassing our tribulations and losses. It is a sign, 
God willing, that this sacred instruction will have the effect of an atom bomb against 
the  aggressive  troops of misguidance, who are on the assault at this time throughout 
the earth in the most widespread and terrible fashion. 

                                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear Brothers Re’fet, Mehmed Feyzi, Sabri! 
I received a severe warning and sign, and earnestly request of you for the sake of 
the Risale-i Nur and out of respect for this Festival and for the sake of our old rights 
that  you  try  to  heal  this  awesome  new  wound  of  ours.  For  our  covert  enemies  are 
following two plans: one is to destroy my character with insulting treatment, and the 
second  is  to  make  us  feel  coldly  towards  each  other.  To  criticize,  object  to,  and  be 
offended at chiefly Husrev is to cause division amongst us. I tell you that if Husrev had 
a thousand faults, I would still be chary of opposing him. For to oppose him now is to 
directly oppose the Risale-i Nur and myself and to support those who have ruined us. 
It is a terrible betrayal so that an extraordinary thing happened to me for no reason like 
my  stove  disintegrating.  I  am  also of  the  opinion  that  the  last torments to have been 
inflicted on me resulted from your meaningless and very harmful lack of solidarity. A 
fearful  finger  is  stirring  things up here, especially in Ward Six. Don’t make me weep 
this Festival. Quickly make heart-felt peace! 

                                                                            S a i d  N u r s i 

 

515

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
I  wanted  only  two  or  three  of our brothers to be released today. But the Divine 
favour  that  looks  to  us  left  them  behind  here  for  their  own  good.  It  is  absolutely 
essential that our present situation is maintained for around three weeks. For our being 
together  for  this  Festival  is  necessary  both  for  us,  and  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  for  our 
work,  and  for  our  physical  and  spiritual  comfort,  and  so  that  we  can  receive  a  full 
share  of  the  Hajjis’  prayers,  and  to  save  the  treatises  that  have  been  sent  to  Ankara 
from  being  confiscated,  and  so  that  those  who  pity  us  in  our  plight  and embrace the 
Risale-i  Nur  may  increase  in  number,  and  it  can  be  a  proof  that  we  did  not  have 
recourse  to  the  traitors  to  the  country,  nation,  and  religion  by  consenting  to  serious 
errors of the present. 

                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Unable to endure —due to their vein of Wahhabism— Imam ‘Ali’s (May God be 
pleased  with  him)  earnest  interest  in  and  appreciation  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and 
influenced  by  the  groundless  suspicions  that  last  year  caused  Zamzam  water  to  be 
poured  away  and  this  year  prevented  people  going  to  make  the  Hajj,  the  experts’ 
committee  directed  their  unfair,  incorrect,  and  unjustifiable  jealous  criticisms  at  the 
Fifth Ray.  At  this  time  of  suspicion  and  alarm,  the  safest  place  for us is prison. God 
willing,  the  treatises  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  will  win  the  freedom  of  both  us  and 
themselves. Since under these harsh conditions in the face of so many opponents they 
are making themselves read in unprecedented fashion, and making their students work 
in prison in various ways, and through Divine favour not allowing them to be ruined; 
we are bound to be content with this much and to offer thanks instead of complaining. 
It is because of this contentment that I am able to endure all my severe distress. I do 
not interfere in God’s concerns. 

                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i 

 

516

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Of  these  two  copies,  one  is  mine  and  one  is  the  governor’s.  Correct  the 
governor’s copy according to the copy that has my handwriting on it. While studying 
The  Supreme  Sign  this  time,  I  saw  that  the  Second  Station  until  the  end,  and  the 
‘conversation’  at the  end,  were  of  the  greatest  importance, and I profited from them 
enormously. One of you should read and the other listen, so that you can profit too. In 
addition  to  doing  the  corrections,  our  brothers  should  not  remain  idle,  but  should 
study in pairs. 

Secondly: My copy of the Tenth Word, the notebook here containing letters, and 
the rest should not get lost nor remain idle. I am leaving it to Ceylan to supervise this. 

                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
While  reading  Jaljalutiya  now,  it  was  imparted  to  me  the  moment  this  question 
occurred  to  me:  “I  wonder  what  the  relationship  is  between sura thumma nun in the 
phrase  Bi-haqqi  tabaraka  thumma  nun  wa  sa’il,  at  the  twenty-sixth  degree,  which 
indicates  the  Treatise  On  Divine  Determining?”  I  saw  when  reading  the  start  of  that 
Sura, Nun. By the pen and by the [record] which men write,87 that it is the word Nun 
that is the origin, basis, pre-eternal source, and eternal master of all pens, writing, and 
books,  and  indicates  the  pen  of  Divine  Determining,  and  light,  and  the  light  of  pre-
eternal knowledge. That is, just as By the [winds] that scatter broadcast88 looks to the 
Treatise On Minute Particles with a powerful relation inferring an indication, so does 
the word Nun look to the Treatise On Divine Determining with a powerful indication. 

                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i 

                                             

87 Qur’an, 68:1. 
88 Qur’an, 51:1. 

 

517

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal, Unshakeable Brothers! 
Firstly: In accordance with the meaning of “Good is in what God wishes,” there is 
good  in  our  case  being  delayed.  My  heart  and  the Risale-i Nur’s freedom demanded 
that it should be thus. By consoling each other, strengthening each other’s morale, and 
scholarly  debate  and  pleasant  conversation,  and  by  writing  out  and  studying  the 
Risale-i Nur, you will be successful in attracting Divine mercy, which erases the point 
of difficulty, and transforming these transitory hours into eternal ones. 

Secondly:  Since  we  exchanged  the  Festival  greetings  in  the  temporary  prison  of 
the court, as a Festival sweet I sent what is for me the very meaningful honey from the 
village of Nurs together with the Zamzam water which Zübeyir, the hero from Konya, 
brought me. Put the water in the flask of honey and mix them together. Then leave the 
Zamzam in it, and drink it with good health. 

                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
An  important  and  meaningful  question  was  asked  by  someone  important.  He 
asked me: “You are not a political society and three courts of law have acquitted you 
on that point, and this has also been established because six provinces which have kept 
you under surveillance for twenty years have not made any accusations in connection 
with it. Nevertheless, there is a wondrous attachment between Nurjus that is not found 
in any political society or group. We would like to have this difficulty solved for us.” 

In reply I said this: “That is true, the Nurjus are not a political society of any sort 
or  a  group  organized  for  any  political,  worldly,  negative,  personal,  or  communal 
interests,  and  they  could  not  be  thus.  They  are  the  sons  and  daughters  and 
grandchildren of the old heroes of this land, the millions of Islamic devotees who with 
perfect  joy  sacrificed  their  lives  to  win  the  rank  of  martyrdom.  They  have  inherited 
their vein of self-sacrifice so that they display this wondrous attachment, and in Denizli 
Court  caused  this  impotent,  wretched  brother  of  theirs  to  declare  on  their  account: 
“Let  our  heads  also  be  sacrificed  for  a  truth  for  which  millions  of  heroic  heads  have 
been  sacrificed!”  He  said  this  in  their  name,  leaving  the  court  in  astonished  and 
appreciative silence. That is to say, among the  

 

518

Nurjus  are true, sincere, positive devotees who act solely for God’s pleasure  and  the 
hereafter, so that the fearsome secret societies of the Masons, communists, corrupters, 
atheists, godless, and Tashnaks have found no means to oppose them, and so want to 
ruin  and  scatter  them  through  ‘flexible’  laws  by  deceiving  the  Government  and 
judiciary. God willing, they can do nothing, only be the reason for the devotees of the 
Risale-i Nur and of the faith increasing in number.” 

                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
I  am  going  to  relate  to  you  a  question  and  answer  of  forty  years  ago  which 
resembles that of yesterday. In those days of long ago, since the Old Said’s students’ 
passionate attachment to their Master was such they would sacrifice their very lives for 
him, the  Old Said was able to halt the Armenian Tashnak revolutionaries around Van 
and Bitlis, where they were very active, and was able to suppress them to a degree. He 
found  Mauser  rifles  for  his students, and for a while his medrese was like a barracks 
with guns and books side by side. Then a General from the army came and saw them 
and  said:  “This  isn’t  a  medrese,  it’s  a  barracks.”  Because  of  the  Bitlis  Incident  he 
became suspicious, and ordered that they collected up our rifles. A month or two later, 
the Great War broke out and I reclaimed my rifles. Anyway... 

They  asked  me  in  connection  the  above:  “The  Armenian  revolutionaries,  among 
whom are fervent devotees ready to sacrifice their lives, are frightened of you, so that 
when you climb the mountain Erek Dagi near Van, they withdraw and go elsewhere. 
What force do you have that makes them do that?” 

In  reply  I  told  them:  “Since  the  Armenian  devotees  display  this  wondrous  self-
sacrifice  for  the  fleeting  life  of  this  world  and  the  temporary  interests  of  trifling, 
negative nationalism, and attack us, surely the students, who strive for everlasting life 
and  the  positive  interests  of  vast,  sacred  Islamic  nationhood  and  believe  that  the 
appointed hour cannot be changed, will not lag behind those devotees.89 If necessary, 
they unhesi 

                                             

89 Impotently, I say in the name of my brothers: if necessary, we shall overtake them and 
advance far beyond them, God willing. We shall show that we are the heirs of our forefathers both in 
religion, and in heroism. 

 

519

tatingly  and  proudly  sacrifice  the  certain  appointed  hour  and  few  years  of  illusory 
outward  life  for  millions  of  years  of  true  life  and  the  well-being  and  interests  of 
thousands of millions of their fellow believers.” 

                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal, Faithful, Kindly Brothers! 
For two days I have felt an aching in my head and nerves from ’flu. And needing 
the  consolation  and  companionship  in  such  circumstances  of  meeting  with  friends,  I 
was  constricted  by  the  terrible loneliness and isolation. Complaints like the following 
occurred to me: “Why do we suffer this torment? How does it benefit our work?” 

Then this morning the following was imparted to me: for us to be set this rigorous 
examination,  and  to  be  struck  on  the  touchstone  numerous  times  to  see  clearly 
whether  we  are  gold  or  brass,  and  to  be  tried  unfairly  in  every  respect,  and  to  be 
passed  through  ever  finer  sieves  three  or  four  times  to  see  whether  our  evil-
commanding  souls  take  a  share  or  are  playing  any  tricks,  is  extremely  necessary  for 
our service, which should be purely and solely in the name of truth and reality, so that 
Divine Determining and dominical grace permit it. For by being exhibited in this field 
of  trial  and  examination  confronted  by  obdurate,  unjust  enemies  and  their  pretexts, 
everyone  has  understood that there is no trickery, no egotism, no malice, no worldly 
or  personal  interests,  nor  those  that  look  to  the hereafter, mixed in with our service, 
and that it is completely sincere and proceeds from truth and reality. If it had remained 
concealed, it could have been given numerous meanings. The mass of believers would 
not have had confidence in it. They would have said: “Perhaps they are deceiving us,” 
and  the  elite  too  would  have  had  their  suspicions.  Thinking  that  “perhaps  they  are 
acting  the  same  as  some  of  those  who  sell  themselves  to  acquire  spiritual  rank  for 
themselves  and  to  win  confidence,”  they  would  not  feel  completely  certain  about  it. 
Now,  following  the  examination,  even  the  most  stubborn  and  obdurate  person  is 
compelled  to  submit.  If  your  hardship  is  one,  your  profits  are  a  thousandfold.  God 
willing. 

                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i 

 

520

In His Name, be He glorified! 

Just  when  with  their  stringent  prohibitions  they  were  trying  to  scare  people 
everywhere  away  from  me,  the  advertisement  in  the  newspaper  about  the  incident 
when  I  was  a  prisoner-of-war  has  increased  their  interest.  Yesterday,  three  officials 
who  are  in favour of insulting my person  said in the prison yard: “The people gather 
when  Said  appears  at  the  window,  and  they  look  at  him.  He  must  not  stand  at  the 
window or we’ll change his ward.” The Chief Warder said this. But don’t you worry 
at  all.  I  have  decided  to  endure  all  difficulties.  God  willing,  through  the  blessings  of 
your prayers, the distress will turn into joy. 

Essentially, the incident is true, but because I had no witnesses, I never described 
it in detail. I did not realize that a squad had come to execute me; I understood later. I 
did not know that the Russian Commander then said some things in Russian by way of 
apology.  That  is  to  say,  the  Muslim  Major  who  was  present  and  who  reported  the 
incident  to  the newspaper understood; apparently the Commander said several times: 
“Forgive me!” 

My brothers! When I am busy with the Risale-i Nur, the distress diminishes. That 
means,  our  duty  is  to  be  occupied  with  its  treatises  and  to  give  no  importance  to 
passing things, and to offer thanks in patience. 

                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

An Astonishing Trait in Bediuzzaman’s Character 

 [This  appeared  in  the  15th  Teshrin-i  Evvel,  1948  number  of  the  magazine 
Ehl-i Sünnet. It was written by the magazine’s owner, who is a lawyer.] 

Bediuzzaman was taken prisoner the same day that I was wounded and captured 
in Bitlis during the First World War. He was sent to Siberia, to one of the big prisoner-
of-war camps. I was on the island of Nangün near Baku. One day, Nicola Nicolayavich 
visited  the  camp  in  order  to  inspect  the  prisoners.  While  passing  in  front  of 
Bediuzzaman,  Bediuzzaman  ignored  him,  not  so  much  as  stirring  a  finger.  This 
attracted  the  the  Commander-in-Chief’s  attention.  On  some  pretext,  he  passed  by  a 
second  time,  and  again  Bediuzzaman  did  not  stir.  He  passed  by  a  third  time,  and 
stopped, then the following exchange ensued: 

“Do you know who I am?” 

 

521

“Yes, I know. You are Nicola Nicolayavich, the Czar’s uncle and Commander-in-

Chief of the Caucasian Front.” 

“So why do you insult me?” 
“Forgive  me,  but  I  have  not  insulted  you.  I  merely  doing  what  my  beliefs 

demand.” 

“What do your beliefs demand?” 
“I am a Muslim scholar. I have belief in my heart. Someone with belief in his heart 
is  superior  to  one  without  belief.  If  I  had  risen  to  my  feet,  I  would  have  been 
disrespectful to my beliefs. I did not stand up for that reason.” 

“In that case, by saying that I am without belief, you are insulting both my person, 
and the army to which I belong, and my nation, and the Czar. A military court will be 
set up at once and you shall be interrogated.” 

On this command, a military court was set up. The Turkish, German, and Austrian 
officers  in  the  headquarters  all  pleaded  with  Bediuzzaman  to  apologize  to  the 
Commander-in-Chief. He replied like this: 

“I  want  to  travel  to  the  realm  of  the  hereafter,  to  the  presence  of  God’s 
Messenger  (PBUH),  and  I  have  to  have  a  passport.  I  can’t  act  contrarily  to  my 
beliefs.” 

No one could open their mouths in the face of this, and awaited the results. The 
interrogation ceased, and they passed a sentence of execution for insulting the Russian 
Czar and army. Bediuzzaman said cheerfully to the officer leading the squad that came 
to carry out the sentence: “Allow me fifteen minutes to perform my duties.” He took 
the  ablutions,  then  while  performing  two  rak‘ats  of  prayers,  Nicola  Nicolayavich 
appeared. He said:  

“Forgive  me!  I  supposed  you  acted  as  you  did  to  insult  me,  so  I  had  you  tried 
according to the law. But now I realize that you were merely acting out of your beliefs 
and were carrying out what they enjoin. The judgement is quashed. You are worthy of 
respect for the firmness of your belief. I disturbed you, again, forgive me.” 

A  Major,  one  of  Bediuzzaman’s  companions,  described  this  high  trait  of  his 
character  and  firmness  of  religion,  which  is  a  worthy  example  for  all  Muslims,  as  he 
himself witnessed it. When I heard it, involuntarily my eyes filled with tears. 
                                                                              Abdurrahim90 

                                             

90 Ustad did not ask for this article to be published in the newspaper, but being both of great 

interest, and an instructive example, and very exciting, it has been included here. Husrev 

 

522

My Brothers! 
I  have  no  appetite,  and  because  gifts  upset  me  I  have  sent  you  my  share,  which 
consists of three portions of butter, a basket of grapes, a bag of apples, two packets of 
tea,  and  sugar.  I  was  going  to  give  them to you as a  gift, but I asked, and you have 
some too. With the money from them I am going to buy things like yoghurt, eggs, and 
bread, so the Medresetü’z-Zehra is not displeased at me, saying that I did not eat the 
gifts.  Sell  them  to  the  needy,  cheaply,  and  to  the  deserving,  so  that  the  gifts  of  the 
Medresetü’z-Zehra and its branches will be blessed in two respects, and be healing for 
both  me  and  those  who  receive  them.  Let  Husrev  supervise  it,  and  Ceylan and Hıfzı 
sell them. 

                                                                                      S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly:  The  following  was  imparted  to  me  in  connection  with  the  newspaper 
article about me: an imperious Russian Commander swallowed his anger in the face of 
the  dignity  of  your  belief,  and  apologized,  so  if  the  officials  who  have  seen  the truly 
powerful,  sincere  teachings  —a  hundred  times  better  than  I  could  give—  of  the 
Risale-i Nur which gain firm belief for  a person, persist in their obduracy and do not 
see  the  matter  fairly,  certainly  no  punishment other than Hell could purify them. The 
penalty for such a vast crime could not be paid in a brief lifetime. For if oil goes bad, it 
is inedible; it is not like milk and yoghurt. God willing, the Risale-i Nur will save most 
of them, before they are corrupted. 

Secondly:  Let  Mehmed  Feyzi  write  to  Bedri  and  tell  him  that  I  am  including  all 

those he mentioned in his letter in my prayers. They too should pray for me. 

                                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly:  It  has  been  imparted  to  me  that  I  should  describe  the  astonishing  and 

instructive treatment I have received during my two periods of captivity. As follows:  

I was in a ward in Kosturma in Russia together with ninety other offi 

 

523

cers who were being held as prisoners-of-war. I used to give them religious instruction 
from  time to  time.  One  day  the  Russian commander came and he saw this, and said: 
“This Kurd was made a militia commander and he slaughtered many of our men. Now 
he’s  giving  political  instruction  here.  I  am  forbidding  this.  He  must  give  no 
instruction.” Two days later he again came, and this time permitted it, saying: “Since 
what you are teaching is not political, but religious and moral, you may continue.” 

During my second captivity, here in this prison, the court officials forbade one of 
my  close  brothers  to  come  to  me,  although  he  has  listened  to  my  reading  from  the 
Risale-i  Nur  for  twenty  years,  and  himself  reads  better  than  I  do.  Neither  did  they 
permit those who attend to my essential needs to come, lest they received instruction 
from  me.  However,  the  Risale-i Nur leaves no need for other teaching, and we have 
no  other  teachings,  and  we  have  no  secrets  that  have  not  been  divulged.  Anyway, 
certain circumstances have made me cut a long story short. 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Two  or  three  times I have been afflicted with an important state of mind. Thirty 
years  ago  it  made  me  leave  Istanbul’s  glittering  social life  while  I  was in the Darü’l-
Hikmeti’l-Islâmiye and took me up the high hill known as Yûsha Tepesi, where it did 
not  even  permit  me  to  have  the  late  Abdurrahman,  who  was in Istanbul and was the 
first student and hero of the Risale-i Nur, with me to attend to my needs. Now the first 
stages of a state of mind similar to that revolution of the spirit, which showed up the 
nature  of  the  New  Said,  have  begun  in  me.  I  reckon  it  is  a  sign  a  Third  Said  will 
appear, who  will abandon the world altogether. That means, the  Risale-i Nur and its 
heroic students will perform my duties, and no need remains for me. Anyway, all the 
comprehensive parts  of the Risale-i Nur and all its unshakeable, sincere students give 
instruction far better than me. 

                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

Firstly: I have surmised from a number of signs that of the  collections  that have 
been published, it is the Guide For Youth that they give most importance to. I reckon 
that Hüve Nüktesi (The Air: A Window Onto  

 

524

Divine Unity) has broken the backs of our covert atheist enemies, and smashed the idol 
of Nature, their foundation and support. For although it was to an extent possible to 
hide that idol in the dense earth, it was impossible to do so in the transparent air. As a 
result,  because  of  their  obdurate  disbelief  and  apostasizing  obstinacy,  they  are 
deceiving  the  judiciary  and  inciting  it  against  us.  God  willing,  the  Risale-i  Nur  will 
induce the members of the judiciary to look on us favourably, and will make this attack 
come to nothing too. 

Secondly:  Now,  both  the  Ehl-i  Sünnet  magazine,  and  the  newspaper  here,  and 
Zübeyir’s fiery reply, and their preoccupation with the Risale-i Nur have been effective 
advertisements for it. You take a look at the pieces about us that would please me, in 
my place, and then inform me of them. 

                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers, Mehmed, Mustafa, Ibrahim, and Ceylan! 
Firstly:  Yesterday  I  saw  you  engrossed  in  conversation,  I  was  delighted  and 
pleased. I listened happily as though I was at your side. Then suddenly I saw that there 
were  people  listening  to  you  on  both  sides.  It  continued  half  an  hour. I was worried 
and said to myself: it is possible that among those listening is a spy who will make a 
mountain  out  of  a  molehill  and  give  the  wrong  meanings.  He  may  be  listening 
carefully,  but  because  of  their  lack  of  caution  and  enjoyment,  the  brothers  who  are 
chatting are not looking at them or being careful. I sent this as an answer. Thanks be 
to God, I knew that nothing harmful had been said, but we have to be cautious at this 
sensitive time. 

Secondly: I understood from a letter written by Hoja Hasan that his good opinion 
of  me  is  a  hundred  times  greater  than  my  due,  and  that  he  will  be a publisher of the 
Risale-i  Nur  who  works  on  the  same  system  as  the  hero  of  Denizli,  the  late  Hasan 
Feyzi. God willing, other Hasan Feyzi’s like him will emerge in Afyon too and it will 
not lag behind Denizli, and will transform our hardships into mercy. 

                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i 

 

* * * 

 

525

My Brothers! 
I  have  not  been  curious  about  the  newspapers,  but  articles  supporting  us 
appearing  at  this  time  in  both  Ehl-i  Sünnet  and  Sebil-ür-Resad  has  confused  those 
jealous people who oppose us and the covert hostile atheists. The possibility that they 
might try to silence those friends made me anxious. 

                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

Some true solace, which reduces to nothing our distressing tribulations 
The First: Our troubles being transformed into mercy. 
Second:  The  pleasure  to  be  found  within  the  justice  of  Divine  Determining,  and 

the relief felt in submitting to it. 

Third: The joy resulting from the Divine favour particular to the Nurjus. 
Fourth: The pleasure of our tribulations being transitory and passing. 
Fifth: Significant rewards. 
Sixth: Not interfering in God’s concerns. 
Seventh:  Suffering  only  little  difficulty  and  slight wounds in the  face of even the 

severest attacks. 

Eighth: These hardships being very minor in comparison with those others suffer. 
Ninth: Happiness at the effects of the widespread advertising of the Risale-i Nur, 
which  arise  from  the  exacting  test  and  examination  of  serving  the  Risale-i  Nur  and 
belief. 

These nine spiritual joys are a salve and medicine so soothing and sweet they are 

indescribable; they ease our terrible pains. 

                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

My Dear, Loyal, Steadfast Brothers! 
With all their stratagems, the dissemblers’ attacks these last ten months and their 
getting hold of an official has not shaken even the youngest student. Their slanders are 
insignificant. In the face of the  

 

526

hundred lies of his that we proved, he found one single error he said was contrary to 
the facts, in one of our letters, that a newspaper had reported that the former governor 
had been promoted. But the error was the newspaper’s. Anyway... such slanders from 
such people have virtually no effect on us, and, God willing, they will cause no harm 
to  the  Risale-i  Nur  circle.  As  I  told  you  before,  don’t  give  any  importance  to  the 
written  calumnies  of  that  official,  don’t  let  them  confuse  your  ideas.  If  there  is  any 
legal point the reply to which is not found in my defence, give a brief answer. And say: 
“Said says: So as not to vex the three courts which acquitted us, nor be in contempt of 
them, I am not going to afford importance to that malicious indictment by replying to 
it.  My  long  defence,  especially  the  ten  points  showing  the  ten  ways  it  is  illegal, 
furnishes a complete and apt reply.” 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

Firstly: It is an instance of Divine favour that I did not hear that man’s slanderous 
indictment.  I  would  otherwise  have  spoken  vehemently.  I  would  have  said  to  the 
Chairman of the Court: I am taking you to court, that is, you and your injustice to the 
Supreme Tribunal at the Last Judgement, and I am taking your contempt of the law to 
the court of this world. And the reason I said I have no lawyer was to tell them that he 
is the lawyer of all of us in general matters, and only I can reply to the attacks on my 
person. You may tell Ahmed Hikmet this.  

Secondly: Our former defences are sufficient to answer the prosecutor’s charges. 
Thirdly:  Mustafa  Osman  and  Ceylan  wrote  and  told  me  what  they  thought  of  it 
and that it had caused them no discomfort, and that it would have no adverse effects in 
the  Risale-i  Nur  circle  either.  I  saw  the  hero  Tahiri.  He  had  the  same  idea.  I  was 
curious as to what Husrev, the Feyzi’s, and Sabri thought. 

Fourthly:  I  reckon  it  is  because  disbelief  and  misguidance  now  attack  us  in  the 
form  of  secret  societies  and  political  groups  that  Divine  Determining  makes  them 
torment us with this extreme tyranny and accusation of being a political society. That 
means there is overriding need for the believers to be united. We were unaware of that 
fact, so received the blow of justice from Divine Determining. 

                                                                           S a i d  N u r s i 

 

527

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly:  When  there  is  a  despotic  Cabinet  which  prevents  people  going  on  the 
Hajj, pours away Zamzam water, permits us to be treated extremely unjustly, attaches 
no  importance  to  Zülfikâr  and  The  Illuminating  Lamp  (Siracü’n-Nûr)  being  seized, 
promotes the officials who torment us maliciously and illegally, and does not hear the 
loud weeping through the tongue of disposition at the oppression in our house, at such 
a time, the best place to be is prison. Only, if it was possible, it would best if we were 
transferred to another prison. 

Secondly:  Just  as  they  force  the  most  unsuitable  people  to  read  the  most 
confidential  treatises,  so they insist and force us to be a  political society. But we felt 
no need at all to be a  political society or secret revolutionary group of any sort. For 
among the Nurjus,  through sincerity and self-sacrifice, the Islamic brotherhood of the 
unified  community  of  believers  has  unfolded  to  a  high  degree.  With  the  powerful 
devotion  they  have  inherited  from  their  millions  of  forefathers,  the  Risale-i  Nur 
students are bound to a truth for which their forefathers sacrificed their lives, and this 
has left no need up to now for any society, official or political, secret or open, or any 
revolutionary group. This means there is now a need, for Divine Determining has set 
them to pester us. They tyrannize us with accusations of an imaginary political society. 
And  Divine  Determining  deals  us  a  slap  with  their  hands,  saying:  “Why  haven’t  you 
had complete sincerity, perfect solidarity, or been a perfect ‘God’s party’?”, and it has 
acted in justice. 

                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

Firstly: I know that you are not in need of consolation. Strengthen one another’s 
morale,  and  that  will  be  sufficient.  The  lines  I  have hanging on the wall opposite me 
are  sufficient  for  me.  It  has  been  understood  that  this  last  attack  was  completely 
unjustifiable  and  illegal  intimidation,  and  the  result  of  groundless  suspicions  and 
weakness. However, the stand of the people and police was a sort of objection to that 
meaningless attack. 

Secondly: Is my defence adequate to reply to the new charges as well? Also, are 
Zübeyir  and  the  lawyers  working?  They  are  not  anxious,  are  they?  They  should  not 
worry at all. In view of the matters with which  

 

528

they  have  charged  us,  they  should  charge  all  those  who  share  in  the  brotherhood  of 
belief,  and  even all the congregations and imams, and the students of all masters and 
teachers.  This  means  that  their  opponents  have  gained  considerable  power  so  that 
instead  of  actual  incidents  they  are  utilizing  possibilities  in  this  panicky  way  and 
attacking us with extraordinary delusions. 

Thirdly: My own view is that we should remain in prison till the spring. Anyway 
everything comes to a standstill in winter. God willing, Divine favour will again come 
to our aid. 

                                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

[One of Husrev’s letters] 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

Our Beloved Master! 
While the main duty of the scholars of the experts’ committee was to defend and 
protect  the  believers  and  especially  those  who  uphold  the  Qur’an,  with  their  biased 
reports  about  us  they  have  driven  the  Afyon  legal  authorities  to investigate us in the 
closest  detail;  have  kept  you,  our  beloved  Master,  under  the  severest  repression  for 
eight months; been the cause of the imprisonment of us students being drawn out; and 
have  studied  the  undeniably  miraculous  truths  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  in  a  spirit  of 
jealousy. Doubtless, your writings replying to their reports, which incited Afyon Court 
against us, were the work of your compassion. Let alone defending you, our beloved 
Master, who for twenty-five years has been struggling against our covert enemies with 
a  handful  of  students,  and  the  Risale-i  Nur,  which  comprises  the  Qur’an’s  most 
important truths, although it is your right to ask numerous questions of these scholars 
who  have  formed  a  front  against  us  in  this  our  most  perilous  time,  your  very  minor 
questions will do nothing except warn them. The ‘special favour,’ which is a supreme 
Divine  bounty  and,  arising  from  sources  of  which  we  have  much  need  in  these 
sensitive  times,  transforms  our  despair  into  pride,  has  again  been  manifested  here  in 
Afyon Prison. The earth, which has not trembled for eight months, again became angry 
today and twice shook as you were describing the earthquakes which occur when you 
our  beloved  Master  and  the  Risale-i  Nur  are  attacked.  We  too  witnessed  it,  and  it 
strengthened  our  hope.  It  pitied  your  apparent  aloneness  in  the  face  of  the  fearsome 
onslaughts of the cruel enemies thirsting to destroy you. It had physical compassion on 
your powerlessness, came to your assis 

 

529

tance,  and  with  the  quaking  earth  affirmed  the  rightness  of  your  cause.  Giving  the 
good  news  of  “Victory  is  ours,”  which  through a Divine, angelic power, issues from 
your blessed pen, it made us truly grateful to our beloved Master. 

                                                     The Enduring One, He is the Enduring One, 
                                                            Your very faulty student,  Husrev 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 
Firstly: What is necessary are caution, composure, and consultation. 
Secondly: It was imparted to me that Zübeyir was given to me in place of my late 
nephew  Abdurrahman,  and  Ceylan,  in  place  of  my  late  nephew  Fuad.  So  here  I  am 
handing over my work to them. 

Thirdly: I have been informed that the judges of the court have made a pretext of 
the  letter  I  wrote  and  was  put  at  the  head  of  hardworking  but  incautious  Ahmed 
Feyzi’s  Mâidetü’l-Kur’an.  Saying:  “Said  affirms  the  eulogies  and  the  other  things 
written  about  him,”  they  have  made  it  a  reason  for  my  conviction.  I  repeatedly  said 
that before anything else Ahmed Feyzi should explain it —that the letter was written in 
order to not accept the other letters about him, and so that he should modify the other 
part of it— nevertheless he wrote things unnecessarily that make them angry. If he had 
a  thousand  faults,  I  would  not  be  offended  at  him,  but  he  should  be  wary  of  acting 
boldly and incautiously, lest harm comes to the Risale-i Nur. 

Fourthly:  Brother  Ahmed  Feyzi,  the  hero  of  the  Feyzi’s,  should  behave  exactly 
like Tahiri in Tahiri’s ward, which is his medrese, and should encourage his students in 
place  of  the  those  that have been released with lessons  from the Qur’an and Risale-i 
Nur,  and with writing out its treatises. The notebooks of the new students, which he 
sent  me  yesterday,  turned  my  sorry  state  into  one  of  joy.  “All  praise  be  to  God,”  I 
declared. 

* * * 

This time, the assault is on a very large scale. Due to their groundless suspicions 
the Prime Minister and Cabinet attacked us in accordance with some plan. According 
to  information  I  have  received,  and  numerous  signs,  due  to  the  false  reports  and 
intrigues  of  covert  dissemblers,  they  have  shown  us  to  be  closely  connected  to  the 
Caliphate  movement  and  a  secret  community  belonging  to  the  Naqshbandi  Order, 
indeed to be  

 

530

leading  it,  and  have  caused  the  Government  to  be  greatly  alarmed  about  us.    For 
evidence  they  point  out  the  large  collections  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  being  bound  in 
Istanbul  and  published  throughout  the  Islamic  world  and  being  well-received 
everywhere,  and  have  scared  the  Government,  and  unjustifiably  turned  the  jealous 
official  hojas  and  suspicious  officials  against  us.  They  reckoned  that  numerous 
documents and plentiful evidence would be brought to light, and that in the vein of the 
Old Said, I would be unable to endure it and would create a disturbance. But endless 
thanks  be  to  Almighty  God,  He  reduced  the  calamity  a  thousandfold.  In  all  their 
searches  they  found  nothing  to  connect  us  to  any  secret  community  or  society.  We 
have  no  connection  so  that  they  should  have  found  it.  The  prosecutor  was  therefore 
compelled to resort to lies and slander, giving things the wrong meaning, and making 
allegations  about  things  that  were  not  offences.  Since  the  truth  is  this,  we  and  the 
Risale-i  Nur  have  been  delivered  from  ninety-nine per cent of  the calamity. In which 
case,  we  should  not  complain,  but  offering  endless  thanks  and  beseeching  Almighty 
God, await the completion of this manifestation of Divine favour in patience. And with 
the lessons of the Risale-i Nur, we should console those needy and eager people who 
constantly enter and depart from this place of study. 

                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal Brother! 
I understood from a severe warning that the excessive, detrimental, combative and 
politically-minded  pieces  you  and  Ahmed  Feyzi  read  in  court  —outside  the  Risale-i 
Nur’s  way,  which  is  not  to  be  combative,  nor  to  contest  the  worldly,  nor  touch  on 
politics, and only when absoutely essential to defend oneself briefly— has caused great 
harm  to  the  Risale-i  Nur.  In  fact,  they  were  the  cause  of  our  sentences  and  the  ill-
treatment I have received. I am not offended at you and Ahmed Feyzi, but you should 
have shown them to me first. Your position was given you as a material Divine decree. 
You  have to act like me to repair the damage. It is essential that Feyzi also gives up 
the political style of defence with all his strength, and like Tahiri, occupies himself with 
the Risale-i Nur and the new students. 

 

531

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear Brothers! 
It is necessary to try to print the forty odd pages about me and the Risale-i Nur, 
the  list  of  errors  and  corrections  and  its  addendum,  and  the  reply  to  the  Posta 
newspaper,  in  both  the  old  letters  and  the  new,  in  Isparta  and  in  Istanbul,  and  if 
possible  here  as  well.  Since  the  court  is  duplicating  by  machine  the  matters  they 
suppose are against us, it is our legal right to duplicate the same matters together with 
the  ninety  errors,  and  this  we  must  do.  Later  on,  my  long  defence  and  the  written 
objections of such friends as Ahmed Feyzi, Zübeyir, Mustafa Osman, Husrev, Sungur, 
and Ceylan shall be printed also, God willing. 

                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear and Loyal Brothers! 
It  was  imparted  to  me  that  I  should  write  and  tell  you  of  two  strange,  subtle 
incidents that occurred within two hours, and were apparently insignificant but in fact 
important. 

The  First: I was reading to two people destined to be Risale-i Nur students ‘An 
Important  Matter  which  was  imparted  to  y  Heart  on  the  Night  of  Power’  from  A 
Guide  For  Youth,  then  just  as  I  read  “it  gains  for  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  in  ten 
weeks the level of study the students of the religious schools (medrese) gain in five or 
ten years,” this occurred to me: just as through Divine favour the Old Said acquired in 
fifteen weeks at the age of fifteen the knowledge usually acquired in the medreses with 
fifteen  years  of  study,  so  through  dominical  mercy  at  this  time  when  there  are  no 
medreses, the Risale-i Nur is sufficient for acquiring in fifteen weeks the knowledge of 
the  sciences  of  reality  and  belief  it  would  otherwise  take  fifteen  years  to  acquire,  as 
fifteen thousand people have affirmed through their own experience this fifteen years. 

Secondly: That same time, my window, which is heavy, without reason fell on my 
dishes and bottles and food. I supposed that both the window and all my bottles and 
drinking  glasses  were  broken  and  the  food  they  contained  ruined.  But  marvellously, 
not  one  thing  was  either  broken  or  spoilt.  Only  the  meat  I had received as a present 
was spilt. But it was destined for the new students of the Risale-i Nur, maintaining my 
rule of  

 

not accepting presents, and confirming with its extraordinariness the first incident. 

                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i 

532

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Brothers! 
In a way totally opposed to the law, our documents and additional pieces for the 
appeal  have  not  yet  been  sent  to  the  Appeal  Court.  Our  three  authorized  lawyers 
should  find  some  way  of  ensuring  that  they  are  sent  as  soon  as  possible.  For  their 
prolonging  our  detention  for  eleven  months  on  excuses,  and  not  permitting  me  to 
speak in court, and their holding me in solitary confinement for eleven months in cold, 
tortuous, and distressing conditions, tells of a malicious bias unacceptable by justice. It 
is  therefore  essential  that  both  our  lawyers  and  you  do  everything  in  your  power  to 
have our trial transferred to a court in another province. 

                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i 

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

My Dear, Loyal, Sincere, Steadfast, Devoted Brothers! 
Firstly:  The  reason  I  don’t  keep  a  copy  of  ‘The  Mystery  of  To  you  have  We 
granted’91  with  me  is  that  long  ago  there  was some confusion in two premonitions I 
had. 

The First: I perceived through a premonition a terrible event that would occur in 
this country alone, and the rise of tyrants. The mighty mystery became apparent twelve 
years later as I had foretold, but in the large sphere, on the face of the earth. For sure 
it apparently altered what I had predicted, but in reality it turned out to be completely 
correct and the pure truth. For this reason, I do not keep that treatise with me and I do 
not give it to others. 

Secondly: Forty years ago I used repeatedly to say: “I see a light.” I used to give 
good tidings of it. I supposed the light to be on a country-wide scale. However, it was 
the Risale-i Nur;  I reckoned the circle of the Risale-i Nur students to be the political 
sphere of the whole country, and I was in error. 

                                             

91 Qur’an, 108:1. 

 

533

Sir! 
I  thank  you  for  having  the  flag of  the  Independence  Holiday  hung  on  my  ward. 
During the national struggle in Istanbul, Ankara knew that I had performed the service 
of maybe a military division through publishing and distributing my work entitled The 
Six  Steps  against  the  British  and  Greeks,  for  twice  Mustafa  Kemal  notified  me  in 
cypher wanting me to go to Ankara. He even said: “We have to have this heroic hoja 
here!” That is to say, it is my right to hang this flag this holiday. 

                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i 

 

534

 [The  defence  speeches  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  during  their  trials  in 
Afyon Court, which commenced in 1948 as a conspiracy to impose, through 
propaganda, the death penalty, and during which the Risale-i Nur was firstly 
convicted, then all copies of it finally returned.] 

We say the following in the face of those who, departing from reality and justice, 
have  called  the  Risale-i  Nur  students’  attachment  for  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  its 
interpreter,  which  looks  purely  and  sincerely  to  the  hereafter,  a  worldly,  political 
society,  and  have  tried  to  show  this  to  be  a  criminal  offence,  despite  three  courts  of 
law having acquitted them in that respect: 

The basis of all human society, and especially the Islamic nation, are earnest love 
between  relatives;  concerned  relations  between  tribes  and  groups;  brotherhood  and 
moral  assistance  for  fellow  believers  arising  from  Islamic  nationhood;  self-sacrificing 
concern  for  one’s  fellow-countrymen  and  the  members  of  one’s  nation;  and 
unshakeable  attachment  and  devotion  to  and  support  for  the  truths  of  the  Qur’an, 
which  save  their  eternal  lives,  and  for  those  who  disseminate  them.  It  is  only  by 
denying these bonds, which secure the life of society, and by accepting the Red Peril 
—which is scattering the terrible seed of anarchy in the north, destroying nations and 
their  youth,  and  by  drawing  everyone’s  children  to  itself,  annihilates  kinship  and 
nationhood,  and  opens  the  way  to  the  total  corruption  of  human  civilization  and 
society— that the Risale-i Nur students can be called a political society in the sense of 
its being a crime. 

The Risale-i Nur students therefore do not hesitate to display their attachment to 
the  Qur’an’s  truths  and  their  firm  relations  with their  brothers  of the hereafter. They 
accept gratefully any punishment that may be given them because of that brotherhood, 
and admit the truth to your just court. They do not condescend to defend themselves 
with trickery, sycophancy, and lies. 

                                                                       Prisoner,  S a i d  N u r s i 

 

535

 [Husrev’s Defence] 

To Afyon Criminal Court 

In the indictment the prosecution has charged me in two respects, one general, the 
other particular.  The general charge is my service of the Risale-i Nur and my sharing 
in  the  imaginary  crime  of  my  Master.  The  particular  charge  is  my  life  of  seclusion, 
which  is  of  no  importance  and  constitutes  no  crime,  as  well  as  a  number  of 
circumstances  related  to  my  personal  life.  In  reply  to  the  prosecution’s  making  me 
share in my Master’s imaginary crime because of my service to the Risale-i Nur, I say 
this:  

On  the  way  my  Master  has  taken,  I  participate  with all my heart and soul in the 
imaginary  crime  with  which  he  is  charged, in the sacred service  he performs through 
the  Risale-i  Nur  for  the  Islamic  world  and  particularly  for  this  country  and  nation.  I 
shall offer thanks to Almighty God till the end of my days for having given me success 
in this service of religious belief. 

Respected  Judges!  Certain  evidence  of  my success in serving the Risale-i Nur is 

this: 

It was my writing out the copies of the Qur’an, although I had little proficiency in 
Arabic  calligraphy,  in  a  wondrous and unprecedented way, perfectly, outside my will 
and power. One of these you have in your possession. 

The second evidence is my success in writing nearly six hundred copies of various 
parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  which  for  twenty  years  has  secured  enormous  benefits  for 
this country and nation, and for religion and good morality. In fact, in the short time of 
one month I wrote out fourteen treatises, as my friends know. I find it superfluous to 
defend  also  those  points  related  to  my part in my Master’s sacred service, which are 
supposed to be offences. I affirm with all my strength my Master’s written objections 
and their addendum, and I present them to your high court as my own objections. 

Respected  Judges!  Our  Master  follows  no  worldly  or  political  aim  at  all  in  his 
blessed,  sacred,  and  luminous  works,  which  your  court  is  still  holding  and  which 
consist  of  the  truths  of  belief  and  the  Qur’an.  Moreover,  just  as  I  and  my  friends 
confirm  the  sacred  service  he  has  performed  for  this  country  and  nation,  so  did  the 
patriots in the Union and Progress government confirm it. For at that time, they gave 
nineteen  thousand  gold  liras  for  his  university  in  Van,  called  the  Medresetü’z-Zehra. 
The  lovers  of  their  country  admiringly  confirmed  his  patriotic,  scholarly  endeavours. 
Then one hundred and sixty-three deputies out of two hundred allotted  

 

536

one hundred and fifty thousand liras, when funds were very scarce, for that university 
of his in the east. 

Throughout  his  life,  my  sacred,  blessed  Master,  whom  the  prosecution  has 
designated  a  criminal,  has  compelled  even  his  most  obdurate  and  jealous  enemies  to 
submit and those who have sought his conviction in the courts, not permitting them to 
combat  his  vehement,  sharp  words.  I  inform  your  high  court  that  I  am  proud  of the 
service  I  have  performed  for  the  Risale-i  Nur  this  last  twenty  years,  working  as  a 
scribe in his sacred service and all his learned activities, the aim of which is to secure 
the foundation stones of this country’s happiness and prosperity. 

                                                                        Prisoner, Husrev Altınbaşak 

[Tahiri’s Defence] 

* * * 

To Afyon Criminal Court 

As  has  been  communicated  to  me by  the  office  of  the  Afyon  state  prosecutor,  I 
have  been  sent  to  trial  together  with  my  Master,  Bediuzzaman  Said  Nursi,  and  his 
other companions  in connection with the matter of inciting the people to breach state 
security by exploiting religious feelings.  

I gave correct answers to the questions asked of me both in Isparta Magistrates’ 
Court,  and  in  the  office  of  the  Afyon  examining  magistrate.  Denizli  Court,  which 
acquitted  us,  returned  all  our  books  to  us,  and  did  not  convict  us  for  reading  and 
writing  out  the  treatises  of  my  Master,  Bediuzzaman,  or  for  corresponding  with  our 
brothers  who  are  his  students.  However,  six  years  ago,  without  my  Master’s 
permission,  on  my  own  initiative  I  had  printed  in  Istanbul  five hundred copies of the 
Seventh Ray by Bediuzzaman in the old letters. In accordance with the decision dated 
20.7.1945,  Denizli  Court  returned  these  in  their  entirety  together  with  their  box, 
handing them over to me in person. They were then distributed at cost price to Risale-
i Nur students eager for them. 

In  consequence  of  that  court’s  decision,  which  had  been  ratified  by  the  Appeal 
Court  and  had  been  made  final,  two  years  ago  I  bought  a  duplicating  machine  in 
Istanbul and paper, and took them to Isparta. 

Of the three collections which you have in your possession, two were written out 
by  my brother Husrev Altınbaşak, and one was written  out by myself. First of all we 
printed Zülfikâr, containing The Miracles of  

 

537

Muhammad (PBUH) and The Miraculousness of the Qur’an. This we in part sold, and 
with the money bought the paper for The Staff of Moses Collection (Asâ-yi Mûsa). We 
then  printed  The  Staff  of  Moses,  and  sold  it.  Then  we  bought  the  paper  for  The 
Illuminating Lamp Collection (Siracünnûr), and printed it. This continued for about a 
year.  Then,  when  bringing  around  thirty  copies  of  these  collections  to  Egirdir, I was 
arrested on the way, and handed over to the judicial authorities in Egirdir. Not much 
time  had  passed  when  on  the  initiative  of  the  Isparta  judicial  authorities,  Husrev 
Altınbaşak’s house was searched and both the duplicating machine and the collections 
were  seized,  and  we  were  sent  to  court  to  be  tried  for  the  offences  of  a  year 
previously.  Since  they  were  religious  works  which  were  not  prohibited,  Husrev 
Altınbaşak,  myself,  and  one  other  friend  were  given  sentences  of  one  month  for 
printing books without permission. We applied to the Appeal Court, and before it had 
come to a decision, I was sent to Afyon Prison. 

Now, in your high court, because of this altruistic service of mine for my religion 
and  co-religionists,  and  particularly  the  question  of  the  Fifth  Ray,  which  contains 
interpretations  of  Hadiths  and  was  returned  by  the  former  court,  the  Afyon  state 
prosecutor  wants  to  have  me,  and  the Risale-i Nur’s author, and Husrev Altınbaşak, 
and  forty-six  other  student  brothers  punished  for  “breaching  state  security,”  because 
they wrote out these works and read them. 

I  say  to  you  in  your  presence  as  a  full  citizen  of  this  country,  without  deviating 
from  the  truth,  that  for  years  I  have  been  the  student of  Said  Nursi,  whom  we  hold 
with  the  highest  esteem  as  our  Master,  and  who  with  these  works  has  rectified  our 
conduct  religiously  and  advanced  us,  and  has  rejected  it  when  we  called  him 
“Regenerator  of  Religion.”  I  can  testify  categorically  and  absolutely  certainly  that 
neither he himself nor his works nor his students have in any way attempted to breach 
state  security.  One  of  the  matters  concerning  which  we  have  been  charged  is  the 
money  obtained  from  sale  of  the  books,  concerning  which  Isparta  Court  was  fully 
aware and was unable to find us guilty and sentence us. For just as we were in no need 
to  secure  our  livelihoods  through  sale  of  the  books,  so  we  used  the  money  obtained 
from their sale to buy the duplicating machine, paper, and ink. There is no possibility 
of this service, which we performed purely for God’s sake with pure intention, being a 
crime, and therefore request of your high court and consciences that the copies of the 
Risale-i Nur be returned. 

                                                                                Prisoner, Tahiri 

 

538

 [Zübeyir’s Defence] 

To Afyon Criminal Court 

I  am  charged  with  founding  a  secret  society  and  breaching  state  security.  As  I 
shall set out below, since you will form the certain opinion that I have committed no 
such  crime,  I  reject  the  charge  here  and  now.  Yes,  I  can  say  gratefully  and  outright 
that  I  am  a  Risale-i  Nur  student.  It  would  be contrary to  the virtue the  Risale-i Nur 
has  taught  me  to  deny  it,  and  I  cannot commit such a misdemeanour. A person who 
reads  the  Risale-i  Nur  would  not  conceal  it.  On  the  contrary,  he  would  proclaim  it 
proudly  and  fearlessly.  For  it  contains  not  a  single  word  or  sentence  that  demands 
hesitation. 

I tried to describe the Risale-i Nur’s value in forty to fifty pages. I cannot say that 
I  praised  it.  For  I  do  not  have  the  ability  to  praise  any  part  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  let 
alone the whole collection. For it is a true commentary on the All-Wise Qur’an, which 
is  the  sun  of  the  universe  and  its  intelligence,  and  has  been  illuminating  and  guiding 
humanity  for  around  one  thousand  three  hundred  years.  If  any  matter  related  to  a 
secret society has been found in the works, as I stated above, I attempted to describe 
the  value  of,  then  punish  me  for  the  crime  of  trying  to  disseminate  harmful  works. 
However, the wonderful way in which the Risale-i Nur is written has been affirmed by 
learned scholars; it is sufficiently powerful to reform a corrupted society; it is a guide 
for the people of the twentieth century and saves them from misguidance and the vice 
they are dragged down to by materialism and Naturalism, and from the dense darkness 
of their ideas; and through the effulgence of the Qur’an, it has opened up for mankind 
a way leading to happiness and salvation, pointing it out clearly with its light. So if the 
Risale-i Nur Collection does not contain any discussions related to the crime of which 
I am accused, it is my opinion that your court too will agree that to punish me would 
be contrary to justice. 

I was asked by the examining magistrate: “Are you a Risale-i Nur student?” 
I  do  not  consider  myself  worthy  to  be  the  student of a genius like Bediuzzaman 
Said  Nursi.  But  if  he  accepts  me,  I  proudly  confess:  “Yes,  I  am  a  Risale-i  Nur 
student.” 

Having been slandered on numerous occasions by his secret enemies, my Master 
Bediuzzaman  Said  Nursi,  the  peerless  author  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  has  been  sent  to 
court, and every time has been acquitted. The Risale-i Nur has been scrutinized line by 
line  by  committees  of  professors  and  Islamic  scholars  and  they  have  given  reports 
stating that the work is  

 

539

written  with  unsurpassed  knowledge  and  is  a  true  commentary  on  the  Qur’an.  Since 
that  is the truth, why is he sent to court? My firmly held views on this subject are as 
follows: 

Those  who  read  the  Risale-i  Nur,  especially  the  perceptive  young,  acquire  a 
powerful  belief.  They  become  unshakeably  self-sacrificing  and  religious,  and devoted 
to their country. The immorality and vice inculcated by negative ideologies can find no 
foothold where there is indestructible faith. The more those with such belief increase in 
number,  Freemasonry  and  communism  cannot  expand  and  spread.  The  Risale-i  Nur 
proves  rationally,  logically,  and  in  scholarly  fashion  with  verses from the Qur’an and 
extremely  powerful  proofs  and  arguments,  that  materialist  philosophy,  on  which 
communism is based,  has absolutely no connection  with truth and reality, and that its 
theories  are  completely  unfounded.  It  illumines  those  who  fall  into  the  darkness  of 
those rotten ideas, and saves them. It proves God’s existence with powerful evidences 
that cannot be denied or objected to, to even materialists, who believe only what their 
eyes can see. 

With its original and attractive style and elevated literary art, this wonderful work 
quite simply makes itself read, and by high school and university students in particular. 
It is because of this that the communists and Masons know that the Risale-i Nur 
forms a powerful obstacle to the spread of their poisonous ideas. They have recourse 
to  various  stratagems  and  calumnies in order to eliminate the Risale-i Nur, or not to 
have  it  read,  since,  as  a  true  Qur’anic  commentary,  it  is  a  powerful  source  of  belief. 
Although  up  to  now  there  has  been  no  sign  whatsoever  of  any  of  the  lies  they  have 
ascribed to us, they continue to attack us. It is understood from this that they want to 
intimidate  us,  make  us  give  up  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  at  the  same  time  put  before  us 
their  own  putrid  publications.  In  this  way,  causing  the  nation and youth to lose their 
faith  altogether,  they  want  to  bring  about  a  decline  in  moral  standards,  and  thus  to 
make the country cave in on itself. It is their ambition to hand over this country and its 
people to a foreign power. In the presence of the bench of judges I say this fearlessly: 

They should know this and tremble; we are not to be intimidated by mere threats. 
For we have seen truth and reality in the Risale-i Nur, and learnt it and believed in it. 
The  Turkish  youth  is  not  sleeping.  This  heroic  Islamic  Turkish  nation  will  not  bow 
down  under  the  yoke  of  another  country.  The  religious,  warlike  Turkish  nation,  the 
believing,  brave  Turkish  youth,  fear  nothing.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  read  the 
Risale-i Nur, which raises us to the highest degrees of humanity, ensures that we  

 

540

advance in every field, and instilling in us young people love of religion, country, and 
nation, makes us true lovers of religion who will sacrifice all our beings for them. And 
we shall read this work. As I stated above, I have read very little of the Risale-i Nur, 
and  yet I have profited enormously. This work is of the  very greatest benefit for this 
country and nation and for all humanity, and if I had wealth, I would spend all of it to 
publish it. For I am ready to sacrifice my whole being for my religion and the eternal 
happiness and well-being of my country and nation. 

Moreover, I have not believed in the Risale-i Nur naively. Thirty-three verses of 
the Qur’an, and Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) and ‘Abd al-Qadir Geylani 
(May  God  be  pleased  with  him)  made  predictions  that  the  Risale-i  Nur  would  be 
written and would offer  guidance to the people of this age. Furthermore, the parts of 
the  Risale-i  Nur  that  I have read have made me form the opinion that this collection 
consists of works that teach truth and reality and that reform humanity. 

I felt a great emptiness in my spirit, and when searching for a book to read, I came 
across the Risale-i Nur. Then when I read it, I could not be without it or put it down. I 
felt that the Risale-i Nur was meeting the overwhelming need in my heart. I found in it 
the  rational  proofs  of  belief  to  save  me  from  doubts  about  belief  and  knowledge.  In 
this way I was saved from the distress of scepticism. I understood from its truths that 
the Risale-i Nur was written for us, the people of this age. 

Powerful belief is necessary so that one may acquire the elevated virtues necessary 
for  good  conduct and manners, and courtesy. Since the truths of belief are explained 
by  means  of  extremely  powerful  proofs  and  clear  examples  in  the  Risale-i  Nur,  the 
more I read it, the stronger my belief became. In this way I was saved from giving up 
my  religion,  which  is  truth  and  reality  and  comprises  the  principles  of  the  highest 
civilization,  and  from  the  calamity  of  being  swallowed  by  the  Red  Monster.  Thus, 
since  the  Risale-i  Nur  saves  its  readers  from  numerous  calamities,  material  and 
spiritual;  makes  them  more  knowledgeable  than  a  university  graduate;  instils  in  them 
love  of  Islam,  country,  and  nation;  and  teaches  them  obedience  to  God,  and  to  be 
hardworking  and  compassionate;  no  one  who  realizes  its  value  would  give  it  up, 
whatever the price. This sincere respect and veneration could be torn out of no one’s 
heart. 

The  Risale-i  Nur  is  described by the prosecution as a harmful work. I protest in 
the  strongest  terms  at  this  lack  of  conscience  and  lie.  And  it  is  claimed  that  I 
encourage it. Yes, this is true. The hearts of all the enlightened who heard the other lie 
were pained, indeed they wept and gnashed their teeth. The twentieth century is a time 
Positivist ideas are dominant.  

 

541

Things for which there are no proof and evidence  are not believed in, and we do not 
believe in them. We want proof that the Risale-i Nur is harmful. 

If another of the aims of our covert enemies who concoct these lies is to destroy 
the  solidarity  of  those  who  read  the  Risale-i  Nur,  which  is  manifested  as  their 
embracing each other in exceptional fashion due to the bonds of Islam and for the sake 
of serving the Qur’an, and expresses only respect, compassion, and affection, and has 
no other goal in sight. Our enemies should not struggle against us for nothing. I am the 
most backward, the most ordinary of those who read the Risale-i Nur, yet I give them 
this reply: 

Even if one of us is in the east, one in the west, one in the south, one in the north, 
one in the hereafter, and one in this world, we are still together. If the power of all the 
universe was to amass, it could not separate us from our exalted Master, Said Nursi, 
or from the Risale-i Nur, or from one another. 

For we serve the Qur’an and we shall serve it. Because we believe in the reality of 
the hereafter, no force can root out this love and solidarity of ours. All Muslims shall 
gather together in the abode of eternal happiness. 

With your permission, I shall describe an important fact concerning the well-being 
of our country and nation: one of the communists’ secret plans is to incite the people 
against the Government. 

False information was given the leaders of the Government so that Bediuzzaman 
Said  Nursi  should  be  sent  to  prison  and  his  works  be  seen  as  harmful.  But  no  one 
believed the negative propaganda. For years the people of this nation have believed so 
firmly that he is a unique Islamic scholar this age and in every way without peer that 
no propaganda can destroy their true conviction.  

I offer praise and thanks to Almighty God that He has favoured me with profiting 
from the works of a great Master. I am indebted with all my heart and soul to him for 
being  the  means  of  my  learning  about  belief  and  Islam, and benefiting immeasurably. 
Since my Master has saved me from the distress I suffered for years as I wrote, and my 
youth from becoming fodder for communism, and my being condemned to everlasting 
solitary confinement, I am prepared to languish in this worldly prison for years for him. 
If  I  suffer  capital  punishment  on  the  way  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  a  Qur’anic 
commentary which in twenty years has taught millions of people religion, belief, Islam, 
and  virtue,  preserving  them  from  irreligion,  I  shall  run to the gallows crying: “Allah! 
Allah! Ya Rasulallah!” If I am  

 

542

executed  by  firing  squad  on  the  way  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  which  protects  our  young 
people from abandoning their religion and being swept away by communism to eternal 
perdition,  and  from crimes  for  which  they  would be shot as traitors to their country, 
without flinching I shall bare my chest to the bullets. And I beseech my Sustainer that 
if I am cut to pieces by knives for my Master Bediuzzaman, with my blood spurting in 
all directions I shall write: “The Risale-i Nur! The Risale-i Nur!” 

Respected Judges of the Court! 
The education the Risale-i Nur gives is truly marvellous and original; it is without 
equal. The purpose of other sorts of education is to gain material benefits and to attain 
various  positions.  People  study  mostly  for  materialist  ends  and  to be  able to become 
famous,  or  sometimes  merely  because  they  have  to  study.  However,  those  who  by 
reading  its  treatises,  receive  the  Risale-i  Nur  education,  which  resembles  an 
unorganized  free  university,  nurture  no  worldly  aims,  only  to  serve  the  Qur’an  and 
belief. 

Nevertheless, the Risale-i Nur, which consists of serious, scholarly treatises about 
the  truths  of  belief,  is  read  with  such  enthusiasm,  passion,  and  pleasure,  that  it 
awakens in those who read it faithfully the desire to read it over and over again. Even 
though those who read and write out the Risale-i Nur may find their lives in danger at 
the  doors  of  the  courtroom,  they  state  openly  that  they read these wonderful works, 
and  that  they  shall  read  them.  Even  if  they  know  that  the  decision  will  be  given  for 
their execution, they do not hesitate to display this constancy. This characteristic of the 
Risale-i Nur, one of its many wonders, makes one ask: “Did those who admit this, find 
their lives by the wayside?” 

This  means  that  contained  in  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  Bediuzzaman  is  a  truth  so 

elevated that as well as not being harmful they did not deny it. 

Normally  students  are  made  to  study  under  the  constraints  of  discipline  and 
authority.  However,  Bediuzzaman  compelled  no  one  to  study  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  readers  study  it  devotedly  and  resolutely,  the  majority  of 
them without ever seeing him. Such a wondrous method of education was never seen 
in  any  medrese,  either  recently  or  previously,  and  was  never  encountered  in  any 
university. 

The prosecutor said that “The respect in which Bediuzzaman is held has not been 

afforded to any other Qur’anic commentator.” 

That  is  correct.  Seeing  that  respect  and  reverence  are  awarded  in  relation  to 
greatness and achievement, and gratitude and thanks are offered to the degree one has 
profited,  Bediuzzaman’s  works  are  profited  from  to  an  enormous  degree  so  that 
respect for him and gratitude to him are unprecedented. 

 

543

The  Masons  and  communists  expended  every  effort  so  that  Bediuzzaman,  the 
greatest  Islamic  thinker  and  writer  of  the  twentieth  century,  would  not  be  known by 
us, and especially by the young. But the wide-awake Turkish Muslim nation and youth 
recognized that hero of religion, our Master, and they benefited from him and allowed 
others to do so. It is because of this that their extraordinary attachment and confidence 
cannot be shaken. 

Since  the  Qur’anic  verses  in  the  Risale-i  Nur  are  expounded  in  Turkish  with 
supreme art and skill without anything of their virtues, which are the Qur’an’s greatest 
miracle, being lost, every class of people —men, women, officials, tradesmen, scholars 
and philosophers— can read and understand it. Profiting from it to the extent they can, 
they  become  ever  more  attached  to  it.  High  school  students,  university  students, 
professors, lecturers, and philosophers all read it. These educated classes profit from it 
to  an  extraordinary  degree,  affirming  its  originality  and  the  superior  art  of  its 
composition, and feeling a strong desire to read the whole work. 

When  perceptive  and  appreciative  people  first  come  to  know  Bediuzzaman  and 
the Risale-i Nur, they are infinitely regretful they did not know of them previously, and 
in  order  to  make up  for lost time, never  waste their spare  time,  and  if they have five 
minutes even, pick up the Risale-i Nur, and read it day and night. This extraordinary 
interest  and  demand  has  never  ever  been  shown  for  the  work  of  any  psychologist, 
sociologist,  or  philosopher.  Only  the  educated  can  benefit  from  them.  If  a  middle 
school student or a housewife reads the work of a eminent philosopher, he or she does 
not  profit  from  it.  But everyone profits from the Risale-i Nur in accordance with his 
level.  For  this  reason,  the  whole  nation  awaits  your  decision  to  acquit  Bediuzzaman 
and  the  Risale-i  Nur  students.  If  in  this  time  of  tribulation  Said  Nursi  had  not 
impressed on his students the need for patience, endurance, and moderation, as when 
the commander of a volunteer militia force in the First War he mustered his students to 
fight,  so  out  of  the  great  honour  in  which  they  hold  him  thousands  of  Risale-i  Nur 
students  would  have pitched their tents on the heights around Afyon and awaited the 
decision of Afyon Criminal Court to acquit him. 

The work  that Said Nursi and the Risale-i Nur students do cannot be considered 
within the framework of the law and be proved to be a secret society. Why can it not 
be  proved? Is a legal expert who has risen to be chief public prosecutor incapable of 
proving  it  according  to  the  law?  No,  he  is  certainly  not  incapable.  But  there  is  no 
organization  that  could  be  called  a  secret  political  society.  That  is  why  it  cannot  be 
proved. 

It is a contradiction that the statement the prosecutor first gave, which  

 

544

was  completely  accurate  and  in  accordance  with  the  law,  said  that  “the  Risale-i  Nur 
students are not a political society,” and then a bit later for some reason said that “they 
are  a  political  society.”  Of  course  the latter is invalid. We are  certain that the judges 
will see this fact clearly and give the decision that “there is no secret society.” 

Judges of the Court! 
If when suffering sorrow and anguish a piece was broken off the heart, the news 
of a youth losing his religion should make the heart break into pieces to the number of 
its minute particles. 

Thus,  the  acquittal  you  shall  give  shall  be  the  cause  of  the  Muslim  youth  and 
Islamic  world  being  effectively  saved  from this terrible plague. This is another of the 
reasons binding me inseparably to Bediuzzaman and his works. 

Your  decision  to acquit  the Risale-i Nur and give it its freedom will save all the 
Turkish youth and all Muslims from the tragedy of irreligion. For without any doubt at 
all, one day  the Risale-i Nur, a treasury of elevated truths, will be known throughout 
the world. Then you shall be appreciated by all mankind. Your decision to acquit the 
Risale-i  Nur  will  make  the  present  and  future  generations  grateful  to  you,  and  the 
more it is read and benefited from, the more you shall be appreicated. 

Beware! Do not suppose these sincere words of mine are hypocritical. Absolutely 

not! Because I am afraid of no one while Bediuzzaman is being tried, nor do I waver. 

Only,  with your permission, I want to say  this much: if the prosecutor continues 
to make such despicable charges against the Risale-i Nur, which is a superlative means 
of  preventing  Freemasonry  and  communism  in  this  blessed  country,  and  against  its 
author  and  readers,  and  he  does  not  desist  from  making  those  entirely  erroneous 
accusations,  and  carried  away  by  his  feelings,  opposes  them,  he  will  be  supporting 
communism  and  Freemasonry,  and  will  be  assisting  the  noxious  atheists  to  multiply, 
against whom in truth these charges should be made. 

 

545

[Part of Zübeyir’s Supplement for the Appeal Court] 

Through  its  proofs  the  Risale-i  Nur  repairs  the  belief  of  people  which  has  been 
destroyed  by  the  doubts  and  scepticism  sown  by  the  publications  of  secret  atheistic 
organizations. 

One  of  the  least  tangible  reasons  for  the  youth  adhering  to  the  Risale-i  Nur  as 
though  electrocuted,  is  this:  for  years  with  unparalleled  devotion  and  self-sacrifice, 
elderly  and  ill,  at  a  time  demanding  extraordinary  caution, with superhuman patience 
Bediuzzaman  Said  Nursi  has  endured  the  various  torments  of  his  enemies,  the 
communists,  Masons,  and  those  hoodwinked by them. With his truth-seeing, realistic 
view,  he has distinguished numerous treacherous stratagems against religion, and has 
written works about belief which will bring to nothing their fearsomely cunning, covert 
plans. 

But what a regretable, sad and sorry situation it is, that for twenty-five years they 
have  tried  to  eliminate  this  champion  of  Islam,  this  matchless  person,  in  prisons  and 
places of detention, in absolute solitary confinement. Even if due to animosity resulting 
from  the  unfounded  suspicions  given  rise  to  by  the  treachery  of  communists,  the 
Risale-i  Nur’s  author  has  been  punished,  his  works  continue  to  be  read  with  ever 
increasing interest and enthusiasm. 

The first and most powerful evidence is this: the young people who read the work 
The  Staff  of  Moses  (Asâ-yi  Mûsa),  which  has  been  duplicated  in  the  new  letters, 
quickly  learn  the Qur’anic alphabet in order to be able to read the rest of the works. 
This removes the obstacle of not knowing the Qur’anic script, which prevents a person 
learning  numerous  sciences  and  compels  him  to  read  works  written  specifically  to 
distance  him  from  religion  and  belief.  Whenever  the  younger  generation  has  been 
decked  out  and  fortified  with  the  Qur’an  and  the  sciences  that  irradiate  from  it,  the 
nation  to  which  that  youth  belongs  has  begun  to  progress  and  advance.  Here,  the 
youth have begun to fill their spirits, burning with the need for belief and Islam, with 
the lights of the Risale-i Nur, a Qur’anic commentary. Thus acquiring certain, verified 
belief,  our  young  people  will  struggle  against  irreligion  and  communism,  and  will  on 
no account allow their country to be sold to the enemies of Islam. If the communists, 
therefore,  find  the  opportunity  to  destroy  all  paper  and  ink,  numerous  youths  like 
myself and older people will be ready to sacrifice themselves, and in order to publish 
the  Risale-i  Nur,  a  treasury  of  truth,  would  if  it  was  possible  make  their  skins  into 
paper and blood into ink. 

Yes! Yes! Yes! A thousand times! 

 

546

In  the  indictment  the  prosecutor  says:  “Said  Nursi  is  poisoning  the  university 
students  with  his  works.”  In  reply  we  say:  “If  the  Risale-i  Nur  is  poison,  we  are  in 
need  of  tons  of  it  and  thousands  of  kilos.  If  he  knows  where  it  is  to  be  found  in 
abundance, he should send us there speedily by aeroplane!” 

When  we  Risale-i  Nur  students  suffer  the  persecution  of  tyrants  for  the  sake  of 
serving belief and Islam, we prefer to die in the corners of prison or on the gallows to 
dying  on  the  couch of comfort. We know it to be a supreme Divine favour to die as 
martyrs in the prison into which we have been unjustly cast because of our service to 
the Qur’an, rather than living in captivity in what is apparently freedom but in reality 
absolute despotism. 

                                                                  Prisoner, 

Konyali 

Zübeyir 

Gündüzalp92  

                                                                                        Afyon Prison. 

 [Mustafa Sungur’s Defence] 

* * * 

To Afyon Criminal Court 

The prosecution wants to have me punished for belonging to the society of Nurjus 

and inciting the people against the government. 

Firstly:  There  is  no  society  called  the  Nurju  Society,  and  I  belong  to  no  such 
society. I am a member of the sacred, Divine society of Islam, which every century for 
one  thousand  three  hundred  and  fifty  years  has  had  three  hundred  million  members, 
was  founded  by  Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him),  the  Glory  of  the 
Universe, and is vast and luminous and promises eternal happiness for all mankind. All 
thanks be to God, I am determined to obey its sacred injunctions with all my strength.  
As for the Risale-i Nur, my being a student of which is considered to be a crime, 
it  is  a  miracle  of  the Qur’an that teaches me  my religious duties and those related to 
belief  and  that  Islam  is  the  highest  and  most  sacred  religion  and  the  sole  means  of 
happiness for mankind. It proves with brilliant evidences that the Qur’an is a decree of 
the  All-Glorious  One,  Who  is  the  Owner  of  all  beings,  is  all-present  and  all-seeing 
everywhere,  and  under  Whose  pre-eternal  administration  are  all  beings  from  minute 
particles to the stars  and suns; it is a miraculous work whose view encompasses pre-
eternity and post-eternity and all events; it is the pre- 

                                             

92 After this defence and its addendum were sent to the Court of Appeal, the Court authorities 

sent a telegraph ordering that Zübeyir should be released from prison. 

 

547

eternal  address  of  an  Everlasting  Sun  which  is  superior  to  all  other  books  and 
miraculous  in  forty  aspects,  and  which  by  giving  mankind  the  good  news  of  eternal 
happiness, is the object of their eternal gratitude. It proves too that God’s Messenger 
(Peace and blessings be upon him) was sent by the Creator of the Universe, and that 
with all his conduct and practices was the most perfect, the most loyal, the highest of 
all men, whose perfections were the most elevated, and through the light of Islam that 
he  brought,  gave  the  best  of  all  news  to  men,  and  gave  them  the  most  sacred 
consolation, and who has taken under his spiritual rule fourteen centuries and one fifth 
of mankind, and to the book of whose good deeds pass the equivalent of all the good 
deeds performed for one thousand three hundred years by his community, and that he 
is  the  reason  for  the  universe’s  existence  and  is  God’s  Beloved.  It  proves  also  with 
brilliant proofs that both the hereafter, and Paradise and Hell are certain and definite. 

With its words and sentences, the Risale-i Nur testifies that it is a pre-eternal and 
post-eternal light proceeding from the light of the Qur’an and the Light of Muhammad 
(PBUH). In respect of its belonging to the Qur’an and being a special commentary on 
it,  it  pertains  to  the  heavens  and  the  Divine  Throne.  Thus,  with  all  its  Words,  all  its 
Flashes and Rays, and all its Letters, the Risale-i Nur, which is supposed to be inciting 
the people against the Government, teaches the Divine truths, and principles of Islam, 
and mysteries of the Qur’an. Is it a crime, then, to read the Risale-i Nur, which is thus 
elevated and worthy of veneration, and teaches good morality and virtue and the truths 
of  belief,  and to copy out its parts, which bestow eternal happiness, or to serve it so 
that believers may profit from it with respect to their belief? Is that inciting the people 
against the Government? And to visit the author of such a blessed and sublime work, a 
monument  of  light  who  is  decked  out  with  the  highest  degree  of  belief,  laudable 
morals, and virtue and is at the very summit of human perfections, and to be brothers 
on  the  way  of  the  Qur’an  and  belief  with  the  Risale-i  Nur  students,  who  with  their 
good  works,  veracity,  and  unshakeable  belief this century, have defended the honour 
of Islam and truths of the Qur’an, and upheld them, and who have no aim other than 
winning  God’s  pleasure  —  is  to  do  these  things  to  found  a  political  society?  Which 
equitable, unsullied conscience could inflict a punishment for these? 

Judges  of  the  Court!  The  Risale-i  Nur’s  veracity  has  been  affirmed  by  the  most 
advanced  scholars,  and  with  its gaining  for  its  readers  the  highest  level of  belief  and 
greatest love of Islam, there is no doubt that all its Words, and its Flashes and Rays are 
luminous commentaries on the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition. They are all brilliant 
suns which dispel  

 

548

spiritual  sicknesses  and  darkness.  As  is  testified  to  by  his  pure  and  upright  life,  our 
Master has passed his life on the way of belief and the Qur’an, and enduring every sort 
of difficulty and distress, has by disseminating the truths of the Qur’an worked to save 
the sons of this blessed nation in particular from the awesome attacks of communism 
and  every  sort  of  irreligion,  and  was  charged  with  the  sacred  duty  of  writing  the 
Risale-i  Nur  at  this  time.  He  does  not  instruct  us  (God  forbid!)  in  immorality  and 
spoliation. He teaches us the saving of belief, the highest cause and most momentous 
question in the world of humanity. It is most certainly a Divine favour that for twenty-
five to thirty years he has striven with the Risale-i Nur to save the religious belief of 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  believers,  especially  by  teaching  belief,  the  greatest 
happiness in life and its most important purpose, to unfortunates like myself who knew 
nothing of Islam. We say the following to those who in a way diametrically opposed to 
reality, consider him to be harmful for the life of society and deny his sacred service of 
belief and work for religion: 

If  it  is  a  crime  to  adhere  to  God,  and  obeying  the  injunctions  of  religion,  save 
people  from  terrible  calamities  such  as  immorality  and  being  without  religious belief, 
and to  make them happy with the permanent happiness of Islam, then he may be said 
to  be  harmful  to  society.  It  is  otherwise  the  greatest  calumny  and  an  unforgiveable 
crime. The Risale-i Nur’s aim is not this world, it is the never-ending happiness of the 
hereafter  and  the  pleasure  of  the  Eternal  Enduring  One,  the  Compassionate  One  of 
Beauty, one shadow  of the manifestation of Whose beauty is all the beauty and good 
in  this  world,  and  one  flash  of  Whose  love  is  Paradise  together  with  all  of  its  subtle 
wonders. Having a thus Divine, sacred, and truly elevated aim, a thousand times over I 
declare  the  Risale-i  Nur  to  be free of all transitory things such as inciting the people 
against  the  Government.  And  we  seek  refuge  with  God  from  the  evil  of  those  who 
with slander of this sort try to crush us and prevent us from working for belief or from 
learning about religion. 

Judges  of  the  Court!  As  is  indicated  by  thirty-three  verses  of  the  Qur’an,  and 
pointed out by Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) and Gawth al-A‘zam (May 
God be pleased with him) and hundreds of investigative scholars, the Risale-i Nur is a 
light  of  the  Qur’an  those  who  adhere  to  which  will  save  their  belief,  God  willing.  It 
most definitely cannot be extinguished or be lost. For example, the attacks made on it 
these last twenty-five years with the intention of eliminating it, have been the cause of 
its  spreading  and  shining  out  in  extraordinary  fashion.  For  its  Owner  is  the  All-
Glorious  Monarch  in  Whose  power  and  under  Whose  command  is  everything  from 
pre-eternity to post-eternity. For its truths  

 

549

are  the  Qur’an’s  truths,  and  through  His  protection  and  grace,  Almighty  God  will 
always make it shine out, God willing. 

Judges  of  the  Court!  If  it  is  a  crime  to  read  and  write  out  the  Risale-i  Nur  —
which  teaches  belief  and  Islam  with  the  highest  love  and  fervour,  and  recognizes  no 
aim  or  purpose  other  than  Divine  pleasure,  and  is  certainly  a  supreme  miracle of the 
Qur’an  this  age  and  a  luminous  commentary  on  it—  and  to  give  its  treatises,  which 
teach  the  truths  of  belief,  to  one’s believing brother; and if the bonds of  religion and 
Islamic brotherhood, which are enjoined by religion, and the sacred, Divine fraternity 
of  uniting  on  the  way  of  the  Qur’an  and  belief  for  love  of  God  constitute  a  political 
society,  for  me  to  belong  to  such  a  society  is  the  greatest  good  fortune,  and  is  a 
happiness  greater  than  that  afforded  by  any  favour  or  award.  Endless  thanks  be  to 
Almighty  God,  Who  bestowed  on  a  wretch  like  myself  the  great  favour  of  being  a 
Risale-i  Nur student, which gains such happiness and good fortune  for a person. My 
last word is: 

For us God suffices, and He is the Best  Disposer of Affairs. * God suffices 
me, there is no god but He; in Him do I place my trust — He the Sustainer of 
the Throne [of Glory] Supreme! 

                                                                                       Mustafa Sungur, 
                                                                                             Teacher 

 [Mustafa Sungur’s Supplement for the Court of Appeal] 

* * * 

1. The Criminal Court: My reading the Risale-i Nur and writing it out and giving 
a  part  of  it  to  a  needy  believing  brother  so  that  he  might  benefit  from  it  was  called 
“inciting the people against the Government,” and deemed an offence. However, in my 
written  objections  to this charge I said: the Risale-i Nur, which is supposed to incite 
the people against the Government, is a true Qur’anic commentary. With all its parts it 
teaches the truths of belief, and bestows the greatest happiness on those who read and 
write  it.  Its  aim  is  not  anything  transitory  such  as  inciting  the  people  against  the 
Government, the way of disruptive, immoral layabouts; it is Divine pleasure, the most 
perfect of all happiness and good fortune. I am proud to read and write out the Risale-
i  Nur,  which has gained for me the highest virtue and belief, the sweetest bounty, so 
that I am its luckiest student and most powerless servant. Although I said that I knew 
to be its student was a supreme Divine gift, and that I constantly thank my Sustainer 
who  granted  this  vast  bounty  to  a  wretch  like  myself  who  was  not  worthy  of  it, 
without basing it on any law or evidence, my adherence to belief  

 

550

and Islam was deemed a crime, and entirely contrary to truth and right I was punished. 
2. While studying in Kastamonu Gölköy Institute, I myself witnessed the irreligion 
taught  us  by  some  teachers.  They  said,  God  forbid,  that  the  Prophet  Muhammad 
(PBUH) had written the Qur’an, Islam was now abrogated, civilization had advanced, 
and that it was a great error and backwardness to follow the Qur’an this century. One 
day  even,  a  teacher  said  that  because  Muslims  performed  the  obligatory  prayers  and 
thought  of  the  hereafter,  they  suffered  constant  distress  and  passed  their  lives 
unhappily; and that in the mosques of Islam there was a deathly atmosphere, while the 
Christian  churches  were  always  happy  and  full  of  life,  and  that  with  their  musical 
instruments  and  other  amusements,  they  enjoyed  life  and  passed  their  time  happily. 
They tried to break the bonds with Islam and belief in our hearts, and instil denial and 
disbelief in their place. 

Then  if  through  reading  several  treatises  from  a  peerless light of the Qur’an like 
the  Risale-i  Nur  —which  pours  out  from  the  Qur’an’s  effulgence,  and  proves  with 
brilliant evidences and arguments the truths of belief and Islam, and that the religion of 
Islam  is  a  never-dying  inextinguishable  sun  and  means  whereby  humanity  may  attain 
happiness and well-being— a wretch in whom had been instilled the above poisonous 
ideas  and  whose  spirituality  they  had  wanted  to  kill  with  their  noxious  irreligious 
lessons, and had even been carried away by them and (God forbid) believing in those 
ideas had begun to disseminate them — if he had come to believe in the Qur’an, would 
not his offering the endless joy and happiness he felt to the compassionate, loyal, and 
true  hero  Ustad  Bediuzzaman,  who  had  gained  these  for  him  through  the  blessed 
Risale-i Nur he had written; would not his telling the Revered Master, who had been 
charged with the burdensome duty of writing the Risale-i Nur, how it had saved him 
from  his  former  life  of  heedlessness and misguidance, leading him to belief and light, 
and  how  it  was  a  sun  of  guidance  and  means  of  happiness  for  all  humanity,  and  a 
Divine favour for all men and particularly for believers; and would not his calling “the 
destruction  and  corruption  of  a  covert  organization  of  the  Sufyan,”  those  who  with 
their  terrible  aggressive  assaults  on  the  Qur’an  and  Islam,  as  described  above,  were 
urging the sons of this heroic Muslim nation to embrace irreligion, and trying to raze 
the  sacred,  Divine  foundations  of  Islam,  to  whom  millions  of  people  are  bound  and 
destroy  their  eternal  happiness  and  feeling  compounded  regret  and  disgust  at  the 
lunatics  who  applaud  them  and  their  base,  aggressive,  tyrannical  destruction;  and 
would  not  his  saying  to  his  former  fellow  students,  who  had  fallen  into  doubt 
concerning their faith: “Come, let’s give up following the lusts and whims of our souls;  

 

551

let’s  bow  before  the  truths  of the Qur’an and hurry to the Risale-i Nur medrese,  the 
guide to happiness this century. Let’s leave those lying scoundrels whom we have been 
applauding for months or years and reject the falsehoods they showed to be the truth, 
and  attach  ourselves  to  Bediuzzaman  Said  Nursi’s  teachings  and  take  them  as  our 
master. Let’s turn our backs on the darkness and embrace the light;” would not these 
all arise from the joy he found in his belief and his love of the Qur’an and Islam, and 
from his adherence to them,  and his devotion to his nation, and his desiring everyone 
to acquire true, verified belief and attain infinite happiness? 

Is  it  a  crime  to  attach  oneself  to  God  and  proclaim  that  Islam  is  the  loftiest 
religion and the bringer of virtue and happiness? At a time when with lies and slander, 
from every side there are overwhelming attacks on the Qur’an and Islam, and attempts 
are  being  made  to  refute  the  Qur’an  and  Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon 
him),  which  are  extremely  elevated,  sacred,  and  precious,  yet  books  which  spread 
irreligion  and  atheism  and  rebellious,  transient,  worthless  wretches  who  attack  Islam 
are held in respect and innovations and the unlawful are applauded — at such a time is 
it a crime to believe and proclaim the sacredness and loftiness of the Risale-i Nur and 
that  as  a  miracle  of the Qur’an it is a Divine Light and dominical  gift which explains 
and  proves  decisively  and  clearly  the  elevatedness,  veracity,  and  sacredness  of  the 
Qur’an and Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him); and both God’s existence 
and that the universe with all its beings and all its members and systems testifies to its 
Creator’s  necessary  existence  and  unity;  and  because  he  possesses  reason  and  can 
think  and  is  the  most  comprehensive  mirror  of  the  Divine  Names  man  is  a  sort  of 
monarch  over  all  other  creatures;  and  that  if  he  has  a  relationship  with  God  through 
worship  and  belief  and  preserves  himself  against  misguidance  and  vice  and  grievous 
sins, he becomes worthy of rising to the highest of the high, superior to all beings, and 
an esteemed guest who will be forever happy in Paradise, but if he denies his Creator 
through  associating  partners  with  Him  and  rebellion,  or  through  heedlessness  and 
misguidance,  he  falls  lower  than  an  animal,  descending  to  the  lowest  of  the  low, 
coming  to  deserve  everlasting  Hell  and  unending  torment  and  torture;  and  that  the 
Qur’an  is  the  true  Word  of  God,  which  is  constant,  and  that  its  injunctions  and 
commands  do  not,  and  cannot,  change;  and  that  mankind’s  true  and  permanent 
happiness is possible only through following the Qur’an’s commands and adhering to 
them? 

The  reading  of  novels  and  stories,  written  against  Islam  for  five  or  ten  minutes 
illicit  pleasure,  and  the  publishing  of  books  extremely  dangerous  and  harmful  for the 
country and nation, and their being praised and  

 

552

recommended are not considered crimes, so can  it be deemed a crime if we read and 
write  out  the  Risale-i  Nur,  which  describes  the  Sun  of  Islam  —which  hundreds  of 
millions  of  people  have  followed  and  in  which  they  have  found  true  happiness—  or 
enumerated  its  elevated  characteristics,  which  we  lack  the  ability  to  praise?  Can 
anyone who has an atom of belief in his heart and desires the well-being of the country 
and nation consider the above to be crimes? 

Respected  Judges  of  the  Appeal  Court!  This  case  presented  in  your  elevated 
presence  is  directly  the  case  of  belief  and  the  Qur’an.  It  is  the  case  of  the  eternal 
happiness  and  salvation  of  millions  of  people.  Concerned  with  this  case  in  effect are 
foremost God’s Most Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him) and all the 
prophets  (Peace  be  upon  them),  and  all  the  saints  and  innumerable  people  of  reality 
and  believers,  as  well  as  all  our  forefathers  who  have  departed for the eternal realm. 
You  may  now  win  the  love  and  good  will,  the  prayers  and  intercession,  of  those 
millions of the people of reality. The elevated reality called the Risale-i Nur is before 
you. Is its aim the lowly, transient ranks and positions of this world, or to win God’s 
pleasure, the greatest happiness, the purest joy, and highest good fortune? And does it 
encourage people to be immoral, or does it deck them out with belief and the highest 
morality and virtue? 

Before you is the Risale-i Nur, which pours out from The Miraculousness of the 
Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition and is a Divine Light. Since the greatest case facing 
people,  more  important  than  anything,  is  to  win  belief  in  order  to  be  able  to  depart 
from this world for the realm of eternal happiness; and since through the effulgence of 
the  Qur’an,  the  Risale-i  Nur  teaches  the  truths  of  belief,  and  as  is  testified  to  by 
hundreds of thousands of people who have read it and written it out, and as indicated 
by  numerous  Qur’anic  verses  and  Hadiths  of  the  Prophet  (PBUH),  and  Imam  ‘Ali 
(May  God  be  pleased  with  him)  and  many  saints  like  Gawth al-A‘zam  (May God be 
pleased with him), it has definitely won that case; certainly and without doubt, through 
your elevated love of truth and justice, above every sort of transient anxiety, you will 
understand  and  appreciate  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  veracious,  Qur’anic  face  and  its  true 
value, and that its students pursue no aim other than God’s pleasure. 

Judges  of  the  Appeal  Court!  With  his  high  morality,  virtue  and  compassion  our 
esteemed  and  elevated  Master,  Bediuzzaman  Said  Nursi,  strives  to  save people from 
the  dense  darkness  of  false  ideas  and  eternal  solitary  confinement,  and  enduring  the 
severest distress and torments has risen to the highest degree of perfection at this time 
through being charged by Almighty God with the sacred duty of publishing the truths 
of  

 

553

the Qur’an, yet entirely contrary to all truth and justice, he is cast into prison. Elderly, 
ill,  and  with  no  one,  practising  his  beliefs  and  worship  in  most  elevated  fashion, 
possessing  the  most  brilliant  intelligence  and  learning,  and  having  no  aim  other  than 
saving  the  belief  of  people,  the  terrible  suffering  of  our  Master,  who  is  seventy-five 
years  old  and  truly  loves  humanity,  in  the  intense  cold  of  Afyon  Prison,  pierces  the 
heart, causing the severest anguish. Trusting in your elevated truth-loving justice and 
true philanthrophy, we await the manifestation of justice’s compassion. 

                                                                            Mustafa Sungur 

 [Mehmed Feyzi’s Defence] 

* * * 

To Afyon Criminal Court 

The  indictment  states  that  I  am  my  Master,  Said  Nursi’s,  chief  scribe,  and  am 
firmly attached both to  himself and to the Risale-i Nur, and have served them, and it 
deems  this  an  offence.  For  my  part,  I  accept  the charge with all my strength and am 
proud of it. For I have a powerful, innate yearning for knowledge. Evidence for this is 
that when during the Denizli affair my house was searched, it was officially established 
that found in it were more than five hundred various scholarly books, some in Arabic. 
It is an unusual desire to study and extraordinary love of learning that made me collect 
these five hundred books, that not one person in a thousand would have at this time, 
despite my impecuniosity and young years. 

Because  of  this  natural  capacity  of  mine,  I  was  searching  for  a  true  master. 
Endless  thanks  be  to  Almighty  God  that  He  gave  me  what  I  was  searching  for  afar, 
from  close  by.  Yes, my Master, Said Nursi’s life testifies that his only aim in life has 
been  knowlege  and  to  learn  the  sciences  of  Islam.  I  have  understood  clearly  both 
through  my  own  observations,  and  from  his  published  biography,  and  from  what  I 
have learnt from his old students, the innate love of learning that I have is found in my 
Master to an extraordinary degree, so that on his own in wondrous fashion, contrarily 
to all the other medrese teachers at this time, he has persisted in medrese teaching and 
endured  every  calamity.  But  then,  because  they  did  not  understand  my  Master’s 
extraordinary  situation,  the  politicians  attempted  to  link  him  with  a  sort  of  politics, 
with  which  he has  no  connection,  even  throwing him into prison. But later Almighty 
God made his passion for knowledge into a key to the Qur’an’s truths, and the Risale-
i  

 

554

Nur emerged, which has left all scholars and philosophers in amazement. Around that 
time,  as  a  Divine  favour  I  found  close  by  in  Kastamonu  the  Master  I  had  been 
searching for all my life, whose nature was similar to mine but infinitely more elevated. 
I shall offer thanks for this to the end of my days. 

Just  as  since  early  days,  in  order  to  preserve  the  dignity  of  learning  my  Master 
never  accepted  such  things  as  charity  and  gifts,  so  he  did  not  allow  his  students  to 
accept them. He would bow before no one. In fact, not condescending to crouch down 
in  the  trenches  in  the  front  lines  in  the  War, or even to enter them, he preserved the 
dignity  of  learning.  Similarly,  heroically  preserving  the  honour  of  scholarship  and 
teaching  in  the  face  of  three  awesome  commanders,  he  was  completely  unmoved  at 
their  anger  and  silenced  them.  I  therefore  accepted  him  as  my  true  Master,  since  I 
knew that he was someone who had sacrificed everything to preserve the high honour 
of this nation and country and the Turkish learned establishment. Even, if to suppose 
the  impossible  a  Master  so  truly  devoted  to  his  country  and  nation  had  a  hundred 
faults, they should be looked on tolerantly and not objected to. 

A  example  showing  that  this  country’s  patriots  in  the  Second  Constitutional 
Period and the nationalists and patriots under the Republic appreciated in the name of 
the  country  and  nation  our  Master’s  extraordinary  service  to  learning  was  that  the 
Committee  of  Union  and  Progress  government  gave  nineteen  thousand  gold  liras for 
his university in the east called the Medresetü’z-Zehra. This was to be organized along 
the same lines of al-Azhar University. Its foundations were laid in Van Province, but it 
remained  unbuilt  due  to  the  First  World  War.  Then  the  first  government  of  the 
Republic  twenty-four  years  ago  allotted  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  liras  on  the 
agreement of one hundred and sixty-three deputies. Our Master’s nearly succeeding on 
his  own  in  founding  a  large  university  similar  to  al-Azhar,  which  was  brought  into 
being only through the enterprise of thousands of teachers, shows that all patriots and 
lovers of their country, together with the teachers of the medreses (religious schools) 
should  appreciate  and  applaud  him.  As  for  us,  because  we  found  such  a  Master,  we 
decided  to  endure  every  sort  of  hardship  and  difficulty.  I  have  boundless  respect  for 
him as an exceptionally learned scholar at this time, who through the effulgence of his 
learning and truths of his one hundred and thirty works has caused me to advance on 
the way of belief and knowledge. God willing, this respect of mine will continue for all 
eternity. 

There  is  no  covert  organization  which  exploiting  religion  and  religious  feelings 
aims to breach public security, in connection with which the prosecution wants to have 
me convicted. Despite months of investiga 

 

555

tions and searches it has not been able to verify any such society, nor do we have any 
connection  with such a thing. Our sole concern, within the framework of the laws of 
the Republic, is for the Risale-i Nur, which has undergone the toughest examinations 
and  has  met  with  due  respect  from  the  highest  committees  of  experts  and  has  been 
acquitted  by  authorized  courts  of  law.  This  is  not  treason  towards  the  country  and 
nation, but scholarly striving in a way that is directly beneficial for country and nation. 
Other  than  this  we  have  no  political  aim  nor  any  other  purpose.  Thus,  since  our 
innocence and sincerity are clear in this matter, I seek the manifestation of justice from 
your just court and my acquittal, as in Denizli Court. 

                                                  Prisoner, Kastamonulu Mehmed Feyzi Pamukçu,  
                                                                                 Afyon Prison 

 [Ahmed Feyzi’s Defence] 

* * * 

To Afyon Criminal Court 

Judges of the Court! 
Is  it  not  the  duty  and  right  of  a  believer  to  serve  the  Qur’an  and  the  Prophet 
(PBUH) by meeting with a scholar of religion, reading and writing out his books about 
the truths of religion, and hastening to the assistance of his co-religionists? Is there any 
law prohibiting us from this service of religion? Is it a crime to criticize certain aspects 
of  the  atheistic  immoral  currents  of  our  times?  We  are  purely  a  body  of  religiously-
minded  people  which  has  no  connection  whatsoever with politics or government. To 
think well of someone and consider him worthy is a personal opinion that may be held 
by anyone. We know Bediuzzaman to be the most elevated scholar of religion of our 
times.  We  know  him  to  be  someone  who  follows  reality,  and  who  expresses  and 
explains  the  truths  of  religion  without  toadying  to  anyone.  We  call  him  a  mujahid 
because  of  his  service  to  religion  and  relying on the Qur’an’s unshakeable truths, his 
undertaking the defence of our country against the currents of immorality and disbelief 
which  threaten  it.  In  a  country  in  which  freedom  of  religion  and  conscience  are  the 
rule, we cannot be held guilty of an offence because of the views we hold in the light 
of our consciences. Therefore, we are not obliged to give account to anyone. 

As  for  the  matter  of the persons foretold in Hadiths to come at the end of time: 

we did not fabricate these. They have their origin in religion. In a  

 

556

number of Hadiths, God’s Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him) said that the 
life  of  his  community  would  not  exceed one thousand five hundred years. The major 
historical events up to that time, which would have the greatest significance for the life 
of his community and for the life of the world, he gave news of, calling them “the signs 
of the end of the world.” He drew the attention of the Muslim Umma to their evil. He 
said  that  those  who  were  heedless  and  ignorant  of  these  evils  would  meet  with 
everlasting  misery  and  loss.  There  are  innumerable  religious  proofs  of  these.  We 
believe in God, His Messenger, and the Qur’an. So as the result of this belief and belief 
in  the  Messenger’s  veracity,  should  we  not  strive  to  save  ourselves  from  everlasting 
perdition? Should we not see what is happening around us? Wondering, “Have those 
perilous times come? Don’t let it be us who are the generation that falls prey to those 
dangers,”  should  we  not  point  out  how  they  may  be  applied  to  existent  religious 
truths? If we disregard the positive evidences before us and the proven scholarly truths 
which take us to the Divine existence, and supposing the irreligion of Europe to be the 
greatest  means  of  civilization  and  sole  mark of knowledge, we  abandon our religion, 
who will save us from eternal perdition? Should we not think of this? Would a person 
of  this  mind  who  recognizes  nothing  superior  to  the  Qur’an  and  its  truths,  throw 
himself into  everlasting perdition out of fear of temporary punishments? Or would he 
attach any worth to transient values? Would he give up his duty of serving God, and 
His  Messenger,  and  His  religion?  These  then  are  the  true  factors  tying  us  to 
Bediuzzaman.  Is  there  any  other  source  of  religion  that  can  silence  the  pre-eternal 
needs of our spirits? 

The  prosecutor  recommends  to  us  the  thousands  of  Arabic  books  which  fill  the 
libraries  but  do  not  interpret  the spirit of today. He himself and those  who think like 
him  may  not  like  the  compendium  of  knowledge,  treasury  of  freedom,  and  elevated 
reality  called  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  they  may  criticize  it.  That  is  a  matter  for 
themselves.  But  they  may  not  interfere  in  our  preferring  this  or  that  work,  or  our 
attaching  value  to  them.  We  like  the  Risale-i  Nur.  And  we  know  it  to  be  a  true, 
unhypocritical  book  on  religion  and  a  Qur’anic  commentary.  Values  and  value 
judgements are questions of conscience. No one can interfere in them. Yes, we agree 
that  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  author  always  teaches  pure  truth.  The  fact  that  he  does  not 
accept  this  does  not  shake  our  opinion.  Moreover,  our  opinion  is  based  not  on  his 
wonder-working  in  the  physical  realm,  but  on  the  wonders  of  his  knowledge,  the 
extraordinary  manifestations  of  which  we  have  observed  in  his  teachings  with  the 
Risale-i Nur, which challenge all the world of knowledge. Can you show us a second 
Bediuzzaman  who  although  his  [official]  period  of  study  was  no  more  than  three 
months,  

 

557

spread  such  a  brilliant  light  of  knowledge;  and  with  the  wonders  of  his  learning 
displayed  a  logic so  advanced  in  the  ultimate  questions of science that they left even 
the loftiest thinkers in amazement; and in a language he learnt only in the second part 
of his life had such a captivating style of exposition, and such a gripping ardour; who 
overflows  with  love  and  passion,  and  is  exuberant  like  a  sea  of  belief,  a  treasury  of 
Divine knowledge, an ocean of wisdom? 

Do  you  consider  it  excessive  that  we  consider  to  be  Master,  the  monument  of 
virtue and light who  shows not the slightest inclination towards the pomp of fleeting, 
superficial ostentation; nor stoops to even the smallest benefit or pleasure; nor attaches 
any  value  to  anyone  who fawns at the feet  of fleeting filth; who awaits nothing from 
anyone,  nor  asks  for  it,  and  accepts  nothing  offered  to  him;  who  displaying  the  best 
example  of the purest chastity and enduring patiently, with forbearance, every sort of 
deprivation, has dedicated himself to the truth and to making known the lights of the 
Qur’an  and  knowledge  of  Muhammad  (PBUH);  and  out  of  the  abundance  of  his 
compassion weeps at the suffering of the country and nation; and who never gives up 
his work, which is for the happiness of those around him, despite all the betrayals he 
has suffered; and disregarding his own old age and aloneness, strives and battles with 
selfless,  Divine  exertion  to  save  people  from  the  pits  of  ignorance  and  whirlpool  of 
denial? In addition to the wonders of his knowledge described above, he is worthy of 
being  known  and  followed  as  an  example  of  perfection  and  virtue  because  of  this 
matchless  self-sacrifice,  self-sufficiency,  and  masterpiece  of  chastity  and  moderation, 
which he has shown at this time when moral values have been lost. 

That is  how  we  look  on Bediuzzaman and his works. Is it solely because of our 
attachment  to  him,  which  arises  from  our  belief, and our belief in the severe rebukes 
and  reprimands  of  the  Qur’an  and  Muhammad  (PBUH)  concerning  unbelief  and 
morality  that he has involved us in politics, which are deemed fleeting filth? Or can it 
be called corruption to inform about God and His Messenger, the truth and the Qur’an 
some  of  the  sons  of  our  compatriots  who  for  twenty-five  years  have  been  unable  to 
learn the truths of religion and are heading for certain perdition, in order to save them 
from  everlasting  extinction,  and  to  reform  their  unsullied  spirits  and  innocent 
consciences? 

Judges  of  the  Court!  We  are  in  no  way  involved  in  politics.  We  know  that  for 
those like us who are not versed in politics, politics is a way beset with a thousand and 
one  perils,  dangers,  and  responsibilities.  In  any  event  we  attach  no  importance  to 
fleeting  externals.  We  only  look  to  the  good  face  of  the  world,  which  takes  us  to 
Divine pleasure. We therefore  

 

558

vehemently  reject  the  charge  that  we  pursue  politics  or  contest  the  concept  of  the 
state.  If  there  had  been  any  such  intention,  there  would  have  been  some  small 
manifestation  of  it  in  twenty-five  years.  Yes,  we  have  a  negative  front,  a  side  which 
rebukes,  turned  to  immorality  and  unbelief.  This  arises  only  from  belief  and  our 
necessarily  joining  in  the  Qur’an’s  severe  expressions  and  comprehensive  warnings 
about these things. If these reasons and this sincere, straightforward style of exposition 
do not convince you, sentence us to whatever sort of punishment you please. But do 
not  forget  that  Jesus  (Peace  be  upon  him),  who  today  has  six  hundred  million 
followers,  was  sentenced  to  death like  a  common  thief  by  the  authorities  of  his  time 
only because his heart beat for mankind’s happiness and he bore the trust of delivering 
the message. 

Having spoken out freely, we shall be proud to face our conviction. With the cry 
of For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs, we open our hands to 
the Court of the Dispenser of Needs. 

                                                         Prisoner,  Ortaklar  Bucağılı  Ahmed  Feyzi 

Kul 

                                                                                      Afyon Prison. 

 [Ceylan’s Defence] 

* * * 

To Afyon Criminal Court 

Making a mountain out of a molehill, because of my service to my Master and the 
Risale-i  Nur,  of  which  I  am  proud,  the  prosecution  portrays  me  as  a  prominent 
diplomat  or  cunning  plotter.  In  reply  to  his  apportioning  me  a  large  share  of  the 
imaginary  crime  with  which  the  Risale-i  Nur  is  charged,  I  say  this:  I  am  closely 
attached  to  my  Master,  Bediuzzaman,  from  whom, by reading his works on religion, 
belief, and morality, I have profited to such an extent that I would readily sacrifice my 
life  for  his  sake.  However,  my  attachment is  not as the prosecution said, harmful for 
the  country  and  nation,  in  order  to  incite  the  people  against  the  state;  it  is  rather  an 
unseverable  attachment  on  the  way  of  saving  myself  from  the  eternal  annihilation  of 
the  grave,  from  which  no  one  can  escape,  and  saving  the  belief  of  my  brothers  in 
religion, which, like me, they are in need of saving in these perilous times, correcting 
their conduct, and becoming useful members of the nation and country. 

I am one of those close to him. From time  to time for four years I have proudly 
attended on him. During this time, I have witnessed nothing other than total virtue. I 
have not once heard him say a single word about his  

 

559

being the Mahdi or the Regenerator of Religion. More than a hundred thousand copies 
of  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  hundreds  of  thousands  of  pure  intentioned  Risale-i  Nur 
students, who have saved their belief by reading its treatises, can testify that he is the 
very epitome of humility. 

My blessed Master considers himself to be a Risale-i Nur student like us. This is 
what he claims. This may be seen easily in many of his letters, which you have in your 
possession, and especially in the Treatise On Sincerity, which is included in The Staff 
of Moses Collection (Asâ-yi Mûsa). He repeatedly says in his letters: “Enduring truths 
like  the  sun  or  diamonds  cannot  be  constructed  on  transient  persons,  and  transient 
persons cannot lay  claim to those precious truths.” So to accuse him of boasting and 
of claiming to be the Mahdi and Regenerator of Religion is not something anyone of 
intelligence  would  do.  For  if  you  read carefully and fairly  all his treatises and letters, 
you will form the certain conviction that the like of this profoundly learned scholar of 
the  times  has  not  been  encountered  for  centuries.  He  is  a  saver  of  belief  the  like  of 
whom will not be encountered, who at a time the red sparks of communism are licking 
the eaves of our houses is a patriot far more useful and productive for the country and 
nation  than  an army. I am regretful that I was not earlier the student of such a work 
and the esteemed Master who wrote it. 
Respected Judges of the Court! 
With  the  idea  of  performing  a  sacred  service  for  the  nation,  so  that  like  me  the 
sons  of  this  land  might  profit  from  the  Risale-i  Nur,  whose  endless  benefits I myself 
had  experienced,  I  had  printed  A  Guide  For  Youth  (Gençlik  Rehberi)  in  Eskişehir.  I 
ask you: how contrary is it to justice that while service of the Risale-i Nur, which is a 
true  and  irrefutable  Qur’anic  commentary,  and  thus  to  belief  of  an  unfortunate  like 
myself should have met with praise and appreciation, and encouragement, we received 
this severe treatment? 

I  request  of  your  just  court  that  you  give  the  decision  for  the  Risale-i  Nur’s 
freedom, for it is the sustenance of our spirits, means of our salvation, and key to our 
eternal  happiness.  If  the  circumstances,  some  of  which  I  have  mentioned  and 
enumerated above constitute a crime in your view, I shall accept with total resignation 
the harshest penalty you can inflict. 

                                                                      Prisoner, 

Emirdağlı 

Ceylan 

Çalışkan, 

                                                                                   Afyon Prison 

 

560

 [Mustafa Osman’s Defence] 

To Afyon Criminal Court 

I say in reply to the matters which have been put forward as offences, that I took 
part  in  the  imaginary  activities  against  the  regime  reputedly  perpetrated  by 
Bediuzzaman  Said  Nursi,  who  is  accused  of  founding  a  secret  society  and  by 
exploiting  religious  feelings,  of  being  engaged  in  activities  that  might  breach  state 
security: 

1.  Yes,  like  many  Risale-i  Nur  students,  I  began  to  collect  the  treatises  of  the 
Risale-i  Nur  and  to  read  them  with  the  intention  of  receiving  a  civilized,  religious 
education  and  learning  Qur’anic  conduct,  which  is  a  national  characteristic  and  is 
worthy  of  true  Turkism  and  Islam,  and  an  historical  honour  and  virtue  of  ours.  I 
intended to become a useful member of the country and nation, and defend it against 
the effects of foreign ideologies.  

How  could  it  be  considered  an  offence  at  a  time  vice  and  immorality  have 
trampled  the  honour  and  mode  of  action  of  our  forefathers,  which  found  fame  in 
history, and poisoned the life of society, and have spilled into the streets to the extent 
of disgusting even the immoral, alarming public opinion, so that it is gossiped about in 
every  home,  and  this  grievous  situation,  which  gives  rise  to  criticism  in  the  form  of 
news  about  the  moral  police  and  of  various  other  subjects  in  the  newspapers  and 
magazines,  which  are  the  tongue  of  public  opinion,  is  rapidly  spreading  and  quite 
simply becoming general — to read the Risale-i Nur Collection at such a time, which 
saved me as it saves all Muslims who  read it; and to give  it to my compatriots when 
they  insistently  asked  for  it,  who  knew and  heard  that  I  read  these  works,  so  that  it 
could rectify their morals too; and so to save through the Risale-i Nur and its effective 
teachings these people who had lost their moorings and were becoming harmful for the 
country and nation; and to give it to them to read since it would assist them to become 
useful  to  humanity  —  how  could  this  be  considered  an  offence?  It  is  the  luminous, 
effective  weapon  of  Bediuzzaman  in  his  sacred,  moral  struggle,  which  is  worthy  of 
praise  and  appreciation.  With  his  effective  teachings  about  religion  he  is  a  mujahid, 
fighting  against  the  dangerous  red  plague  of  communism  which  is  spreading  like  an 
epidemic even in our country and makes the whole world tremble — how could it be 
considered a crime for myself to  have given these treatises to people when they have 
thus in twenty years transformed into useful members of the country and nation twenty 
thousand  people,  and  probably  more?  And  how  could  charges  be  made  against  its 
respected author in the same way? I ask your consciences. 

 

561

2. The Hadith which the prosecution stated was “false” and therefore unscholarly, 
is said to be “sound” in the books of Hadiths. So having been accepted by the scholars 
of  Hadiths,  and  the  fact  that  the  leading  Istanbul  scholars  both  before  the 
Constitutional  Revolution  and  during  it  accepted  Bediuzzaman’s  interpretations  and 
replies,  which  are  now  found  in  the  Fifth  Ray,  to  the  questions  they  asked  of him in 
connection with the questions asked of them by the Japanese and the Anglican Church, 
and those prominent scholars did not object to his replies establishes definitely that the 
Hadith is sound. 

Moreover,  the  truths  of  not  a  part  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  but  of  all  of  it,  are  so 
powerful  that  no  true  Islamic  scholar  could  object  to  them,  so  that  foremost  the 
Directorate  of  Religious  Affairs,  and  true  scholars  throughout  the  country  since  the 
Constitutional Period, have been compelled to accept and respect them. The objections 
of  one  or  two  individuals  who  are  known  as  scholars  but  who  are  bereft  of  true 
knowledge do not refute those truths and powerful proofs. They are merely ridiculous. 
Is  it  a  betrayal  of  the  regime to  write  a  letter  of  thanks  to the author of the  Risale-i 
Nur  because  one  is  captivated  by  the  truths  of  the  Qur’an  and  belief  it  contains, the 
spiritual  and  material  benefits  of  which  have  become  clear,  and  which  are studied all 
over  the  country  by  every  class  of  person  in  order  to  save  their  eternal  lives  from 
extinction, and from which thousands of compatriots have profited and so are eternally 
indebted  to  their  esteemed  author,  since  he  has  saved  their  belief;  is  it  a  betrayal, 
relying on the undeniable truths stated by the Hadith which is deemed to constitute an 
offence, to consider certain acts and works to have appeared in this country, which are 
referred  to  by  the  Hadith,  and  supposing  it  to  be  thus,  relying  on  the  statements  of 
numerous Islamic scholars, to see it as a victory of the Qur’an which will lead to the 
repairing of certain errors and to be pleased at this, and to privately put this view to a 
Master  from whose works one has received effulgence; and to hope that the country 
and nation will not fall into anarchy and thus into the embrace of the Red Peril, which 
causes  the whole world to  tremble — is this a betrayal of the regime? Is it to malign 
the  reforms?  And  although  several  courts  of  law  have  acquitted  that  scholar,  who  is 
utterly deserving of commendation and appreciation, and although he is very elderly, a 
recluse, and has no one, to charge him with the same matters, arrest him, put him into 
solitary confinement,  and  send  him  to trial, and for us  too, to consider to be a crime 
these  scholarly  views  of  ours  and  our  working  to  save  our  belief,  and  to  put  these 
forward as evidence of our supposed breaching of state security, is the just decision of 
which conscience? I ask this of your court and leave it to your consciences. 

 

562

3.  The  charge  of  “Carrying  Bediuzzaman’s  picture  as  though  it  was  something 
sacred, and collecting his letters, and corresponding with him.” To carry not a simple 
picture,  but  one  decorated  in  gold  and  jewels,  of  the  universal  scholar and  esteemed 
author  who  through  his  works  has  saved  my  spiritual  life  and  eternal  life  from 
extinction,  and  allowed  me  to  experience  the  pleasure  and happiness  of  physical  life, 
and  who  has  saved  the  belief  of  thousands  like  me,  and  to  send  him  letters  and 
congratulate him, and to get to know others who love him, is my right as it is for all 
members  of  humanity.  I  do  not  suppose  this  right  of  mine to constitute a crime, and 
finally I say: as the police of two provinces and numerous towns can testify, in order to 
be  able  to  serve  this  country,  nation,  and  humanity,  for  long  years  the  Risale-i  Nur 
students have saved themselves through the Risale-i Nur from being aimless, and have 
been  the  means  of  saving  others.  Although  the  patriotic service they have performed 
for  this country  and  its  government  has  in  reality  been  greater  than  a police force of 
thousands,  and  is  worthy  of  recognition  and  appreciation,  it  has  been  misinterpreted 
and  we  have  been  arrested,  as  though  deliberately  on  behalf  of  some  foreign  power. 
All our work and businesses have gone to rack and ruin and our wretched families and 
children  have  been  left  weeping  and  destitute.  Which  laws  of  democracy  does  this 
conform to? Which just decisions of which just judges? I request from your respected 
Court,  which  executes  justice  in  the  name  of  the  just  Turkish  nation  and  its  high 
Assembly,  that  these  works,  the  numerous  benefits  and  advantages  of  which  are 
obvious and undeniable, are left free and that we are acquitted. 

                                                              Prisoner, Safranbolulu Mustafa Osman,  
                                                                               Afyon Prison 

 [Hıfzı Bayram’s Defence] 

* * * 

To Afyon Criminal Court 

I  am  charged  with  reading  some  of  the  works  —which  teach  the  truths  of  the 
Qur’an and belief and are of great benefit for the nation and country— of the Islamic 
scholar  Bediuzzaman,  who  is  accused  of  attempting  to  breach  state  security  by 
exploiting  religious  feelings;  and  with  obtaining  and  giving  —on  request—  to  a 
number  of  acquaintances  some  of  his  treatises,  from  which I had greatly benefited in 
respect of belief and religion and which had led me to acquire Qur’anic manners, in the 
hope that it would be for their good and they would profit from his teachings about  

 

563

belief, and religious and moral instruction, a national characteristic. In addition, on the 
pretext of a number of acquaintances sending letters of a friendly or scholarly nature to 
my  address,  it  is  alleged  that  I  am  a  partner  in  the  crime  of  the  above-mentioned.  I 
object as follows to these matters with which I have been charged: 

1.  I did not read the Risale-i Nur, which has previously been tried and acquitted 
and  returned  to  its  author,  and  has  been  praised  and  recommended  by  the  country’s 
religious  scholars,  with  any  idea  of  causing  trouble  in  the  way  insisted  on  by  the 
prosecution.  I  saw  every  part  of  it  to  be  nothing  but  an  important  Qur’anic 
commentary which effectively teaches Islam and gives religious instruction, the way to 
make  people  virtuous  and  advance  morally,  and  to  save  nations  from  falling  into the 
abyss. Since this is the case, I do not suppose that to read these with the intention of 
study or maintaining my religion and belief, and to give them to others, and to obtain 
them for others, constitutes a crime. For nowhere at all has any incident harmful to the 
country and nation in which Risale-i Nur  students have taken part been witnessed or 
recorded by the police. In addition, it is totally false to say: “they study and read them 
secretly”  and  to  arouse  doubts  about  a  secret  society.  Because, whether scholarly or 
political,  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  have  no  connection  with  any  society,  secret  or 
open. In fact, several years ago the same charges were made against Bediuzzaman and 
many  others,  and  they  were  sent  for  trial  in  Denizli  Criminal  Court,  and  although all 
the  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  were  scrutinized  in  the  closest  detail,  they  were  all 
acquitted. I do not know the extent to which the imperatives of justice demand putting 
forward as evidence for a serious crime such as breaching state security and betrayal of 
the  regime,  reading  a  work  which  itself  and  whose  author  have  been  acquitted,  and 
giving it to others to read; so I refer it to your consciences! 

2.  Among  the  charges  was  my  being  sent,  while  under  arrest,  a  treatise  by 
someone I do not know from Bayezid. I have not seen this treatise. I am uninformed 
about what it contains. If it is the Risale-i Nur, I accept it. You ask, and I shall reply. 
Only, I learnt that the prosecutor mentions the Mahdi in the indictment, and my Master 
is  innocent  of  all  such  accusations.  Just  as  I  have  never  heard  him  mention  such  a 
thing, so I have not seen it in any of his works. Moreover, at every opportunity he has 
forbidden his students to venerate him, exalt him, or accord him any rank, and he has 
rebuked those who have written him such letters. We have always known him to be an 
important  scholar  who  seeks  no  rank  or  position,  and  to  be  a  precise  and  exacting 
hoja. 

                                                                               Prisoner, Hıfzı Bayram 

 

564

 [Emirdağlı Mustafa’s Defence] 

To Afyon Criminal Court 

I  say  briefly  in  reply  to  the  prosecution’s  accusing  me  of  being  a  partner  in  my 

Master Bediuzzaman’s imaginary crime: 

The service I have performed for my Master and the Risale-i Nur, without having 
the  very  slightest  regret,  resembles  a  mere  droplet  before  an  ocean  of  grace  and 
favour. Just as tiny fragments of glass are sacrificed on the way of obtaining a treasury 
of precious diamonds, so I am every moment ready to sacrifice my life for the Risale-i 
Nur, which is the means of saving my everlasting life. I consider it would be a terrible 
betrayal  of  my  blessed  Master,  the  leading  scholar  of  the  age,  and  of  his  sole  aim, 
belief and the Qur’an, to abandon the Risale-i Nur, the innumerable benefits of which, 
worldly  and  for  the  hereafter,  have  been  established,  because  of  temporary 
imprisonment  and  its unimportant hardships and so that no harm  should come to our 
brief, tumultuous lives in this world, or to be indifferent towards the Risale-i Nur and 
my  Master.  I  do  not  want  to  deviate  even  an  iota  from  what  he  permits  and 
commands. 

Respected Judges of the Court! 
Why does it seem excessive that despite my indigence I should be the student of a 
leading religious scholar who has formed a powerful front against communism, which 
aims to scatter its poisonous microbes over our beautiful land? This surely proves that 
the  riches  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  far  exceed  worldly  riches.  Leave  my  Master  and  the 
Risale-i Nur free for ever so they may save the belief of the Turkish youth like myself, 
and  the  young  people  may  become  useful  members  of  the  country.  The  need  of  us 
Turkish youth for  the Risale-i Nur is thousands of times greater than the need for air 
of  someone  held  in  close  confinement,  and  the  need  for  light  of  someone  in  pitch 
blackness, and the need for food and water of someone parched with thirst and hungry 
in  the  desert,  and  the  need  for  a  life-saver  of  someone  drowning  in  the  sea.  It  is 
therefore not conformable with the honour of justice, because of the above facts, some 
of which I have mentioned, to condemn Bediuzzaman, who has won our greatest good 
opinion  and  regard,  and  to  whom  we  are  attached  with  unbreakable  bonds,  and  the 
many  unfortunates  who  are  his  good-intentioned  students,  and  leave  us  to  rot  in 
prison. 

                                                                        Prisoner, Emirdağlı Mustafa Acet, 
                                                                                   Afyon Prison 

 

565

[Halil Çalışkan’s Defence] 

To Afyon Criminal Court 

Respected Judges of the Court! 
In the indictment read to me by the prosecution my service of my Master is cited 
as  a  serious  crime.  My  Master  came  to  our  town  in  1944  and  resided  there  for  four 
years. For forty years he has given up all the pleasures and comforts of the world and 
worked  only  for  belief  and  Islam  and  to  save  the  eternal  happiness  of  Muslims, 
particularly  in  our  country,  on  the  way  of  belief  and  the  hereafter.  With  the  Risale-i 
Nur’s teachings on belief and morality, he has constructed a barrier against the noxious 
ideas  of  communism,  which  are  causing  great  harm  to  our  religion,  and  particularly 
among  our  nation,  which  is  Muslim  and  Turkish.  The  material  and  spiritual  harm  it 
causes  is  excessive.  He  prevents  too  similar  things  harmful  to  the  nation.  Does  my 
proud  service  on  and  off  for  three  years  of the  Risale-i  Nur  and  my  Master,  who  is 
worthy  of  being  applauded  by  all  the  scholars  in  the  world,  constitute  a  crime in the 
view of justice? It is also shown to be a crime that I left being a tailor to perform that 
service. But if I was to sacrifice my very life for the Risale-i Nur, which is truth and 
reality and a true commentary on the Qur’an, and for my Master, should it be deemed 
a serious offence and myself known as a traitor to my country? I ask you. 

Respected  Chairman  of  the  Court!  I  read  some  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  I 
wrote  some  out.  Endless  thanks  be  to  Almighty  God  that  due  to  the  yearning  I  had 
long felt for knowledge, I began to profit from these treatises. Although I was closely 
concerned  with  them,  I  saw  nothing  in  them  about  inciting  the  people  against  the 
Government,  or  disturbing  public  order,  or  founding  a  secret  society.  Nor did I hear 
anything  from  my  Master  about  being  the  Mahdi  or  Regenerator  of  Religion,  or 
anything about such movements. The sole aim of the Risale-i Nur and our Master and 
us students is to serve Islam, and particularly the Turkish nation, with respect to belief 
and  morality.  Certainly,  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  its  servants  should  not  be  harassed 
because of this service. Our sole aim and purpose was this and nothing else. And we 
performed  this  duty  for  God’s  pleasure.  In  any  event  we  could  not  exploit  such  a 
sacred duty for the world or any worldly benefit, and would not stoop to such a thing. 
We therefore cannot endure the prosecution’s charges against the sincere Risale-i Nur 
students, who have belief in their hearts, are preoccupied with the hereafter and have 
no worldly ambitions whatsoever, of founding a secret political society, which never at 
any time occurred to us. 

 

566

Respected  Judges  of  the  Court!  We  believe  that  you  have  understood  the  aims, 
intentions, and nature of the Risale-i Nur students, and have formed the opinion that 
we have no connection with the crimes with which we are charged by the prosecution. 
We  therefore  request  from  your  high  court  and  your  consciences  that  our  books are 
returned to us, free, and we are acquitted. 

                                                                     Prisoner, Emirdağlı Halil Çalışkan, 
                                                                                      Afyon Prison 

 [Mustafa Gül’s Defence] 

* * * 

To Afyon Criminal Court 

I  am  not a  member of any secret society. In any event, my Master Bediuzzaman 
Said Nursi never founded any such society. He always taught us about the truths of the 
Qur’an  and  warned  us  severely  against  being  concerned  with  politics.  I  am  only  the 
student of the great Master Said Nursi. I am bound to him and to the Risale-i Nur with 
all my heart and spirit. I would be happy with any punishment inflicted on me for the 
sake  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  my  Master.  Through  his  works,  my  Master  saved  my 
belief and life in the hereafter. His aim  is to save all Muslims and all our compatriots 
from  unbelief  and  for  them  to  win  eternal  happiness.  It  has  become  clear  in  all  our 
trials that we have no connection with any political ambitions. Although the reality is 
this,  we  have  again  unjustly  and  irrelevantly  been  dragged  to  court.  We  have 
understood  from  this  that  they  want  to  break  our  solidarity.  Our  solidarity  is  not 
turned  to  any  worldly  or  political  end  or  matter.  We  only  have  the  very  greatest 
respect  for  our  Master.  Those  who  read  the  Risale-i  Nur  acquire  an  extraordinary 
belief, Islam, morality, and perfection. 

We are incapable of not having enormous love for our Master. I am attached with 
all my being to my Master and to the Risale-i Nur students. This attachment could not 
be  severed  or  broken even if I was executed. I and all my brothers are innocent. We 
request  with  all  our  strength  that  the  Risale-i  Nur  is  left  free.  I  request  that  my 
elevated Master and innocent Nurju brothers and myself are acquitted. 

                                                                            Ispartalı Mustafa Gül 

 

567

 [Küçük Ibrahim’s Defence] 

To Afyon Criminal Court 

Respected Judges! 
The crime with which we are charged is both irrelevant and pertains to the world, 
it  is  political.  But  you,  esteemed  judges,  understood  at  first  sight  whether  or  not we 
were  people  who  would  be  involved  in  politics.  However,  even  if  hundreds  of 
authoritative people were to ensure that this cold and alien charge was a hundred per 
cent realized, and my intelligence was a hundred times greater than it is, because of the 
feeling the Risale-i Nur and its esteemed author have given me, I would flee with all 
my  being  from  that  temporary,  fleeting  political  thrill  and  adventure, and spend it on 
the way of belief in the hereafter and being saved from Hell. Both our respect for and 
attachment  to  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  worthy  author,  and  reading  and  writing  out  the 
Risale-i Nur, and our corresponding with the  Risale-i Nur students and our relations 
with them, all look directly to the hereafter, as was affirmed by Denizli Criminal Court 
and the Court of Appeal. So much so that because of the ideas we have acquired from 
the  Risale-i  Nur,  we  would  not  exchange  these  luminous  beings  for  worldly  and 
material values. We will persist in this belief until we die. 

Respected Judges of the Court! 
Since we are gathered together here due to this fearsome charge, I am bound by 
conscience and for the sake of the country to state an important fact: only in my own 
neighbourhood, due to the reform of people’s characters brought about by the Risale-i 
Nur,  over  a  period  of  ten  years,  in  full  sight  of  everyone,  foremost  myself and many 
others  have  learnt the way home. Vice and waywardness have been transformed into 
happy family lives. Mothers and fathers now pray for those who were the cause of it. 
You may listen to the stories of many people of this sort, in our province and around 
it. Particularly  in  Denizli  Prison,  when  the  Risale-i  Nur  entered  there,  it had such an 
overwhelmingly beneficial effect on the prisoners that it is still talked about. It was the 
same  when  I  arrived  here  at  Afyon  Prison;  whoever  I  spoke  to,  they  described  their 
former  states  and  present  states,  and  spoke  gratefully  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  students, 
praying for them. These facts are well-known. I am astonished that love for the Risale-
i  Nur,  which  has  reformed  me  and  my  fellows  to  this  great  extent,  both  socially, 
morally,  and  with  regard  to  the  hereafter,  and  especially  is  an  important  Qur’anic 
commentary,  and  love  for  its  esteemed  author,  and  to  write  letters  of  consolation  to 
my  compatriots,  could  have  been  something  political.  Out  of  this  astonishment  I  say 
that there cannot  

 

568

be such a crime. At the most I can say that the covert enemies of the Qur’an and thus 
of  the  Risale-i  Nur  have  made  the  judiciary  and  police  suspicious  about  us  for  no 
reason, and have thus been the cause of our packing the prisons. For sure, the elevated 
judges  will  understand  these  facts,  and  placing  their  hands  on  their  consciences  will 
give  their  just  decisions,  concerning  which  good  tidings  are  given  by  God  Almighty, 
and  they  will  make  the  Muslim  Turkish  nation,  which  throughout  the  country  is 
eagerly awaiting their decision, grateful to them. 

                                                               Prisoner, Inebolulu Ibrahim Fakazlı, 
                                                                                   Afyon Prison 
 

 

569

The Fifteenth Ray 
The Shining Proof 

This consists of two ‘Stations’ 

[This lesson is a treatise which is apparently unimportant, but in reality is of 
the greatest importance, and is extremely powerful and comprehensive. It is a 
Qur’anic fruit of Paradise and of belief which was produced from the uniting 
—at the degrees of ‘knowledge of certainty’ and ‘absolute certainty’— of my 
life  of  reflective  thought  and  the  spiritual  life  of  the  Risale-i Nur, which is 
based on ascertaining reality through its evidences (tahkikî).1] 
                                                                  S a i d  N u r s i  

The First Station 

[A concise summary of the Twentieth Letter, and Part One of the instruction 
given in the third ‘School of Joseph’.2 It consists of three ‘Parts’] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate 
And from Him do we seek help 

I  am  someone  who  has  spent  thirty-five  years  in  seclusion,  and  particularly  at 
night  forgets  the  world,  and  having  for twenty-three years suffered the annoyance of 
being under hostile surveillance, has become unsociable. Being all alone, I become fed 
up if I am for even an hour with anyone  

                                             

1 According to Bediuzzaman, the aim of the Risale-i Nur is to gain for its readers or students 

‘true, verified belief’ (iman-i tahkikî — Arabic: tahqiqi). This has been defined as: “To acquire 
certain knowledge of all the questions related to belief through close investigation, and to live that 
belief... Firm, unshakeable belief.” See, Abdullah Yeğin, Yeni Lugat (3rd. ed.) Istanbul 1975, 271. 

2 See, page 478, footnote 63. 

 

570

other than those who assist me or are desirous of the lessons of the Risale-i Nur. But 
then, on the pretext of the petition I wrote to the Court of Appeal about being held for 
eleven  months  in  total  solitary confinement in Afyon Prison, they forcibly transferred 
me to Ward Five and forbade my brothers to come to me. I was feeling truly alarmed 
that  I would be unable to endure the crowded conditions when suddenly as a sign of 
wrath and anger, the cold became so severe I would not have survived had I remained 
in my former place. The hardship turned into mercy for me. 

It occurred to me as I was reciting the tesbihat following the prayers: “In all the 
wards  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  are working  as  hard  as  they  can  at  the  Risale-i Nur 
and  its  lessons  both  on  their  own  account  and  in  your  place.  But  because  this  fifth 
ward is somewhat isolated and is constantly being filled and emptied, the need here is 
greater  for  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  instruction.  The  youths  and  elderly  people  read  the 
newspapers, which write about the assaults of Russia with its awesome denial of God, 
and are therefore in far greater need of its definitive, powerful instruction about belief 
in  God’s  existence  and  unity.”  I  was  thinking  of  writing  a  brief  summary  of  the 
Twentieth Letter and the sacred sentence:  

There  is  no  god  but  God,  He  is  One,  He  has  no  partner;  His  is  the 
sovereignty  and  His  is  the  praise;  He  gives life  and deals death, and He is 
Living and dies not; in His hand is all good; He is Powerful over all things; 
and to Him shall be your return,3  

which for years I have recited ten times after the morning prayer. For it points out the 
affirmation of Divine unity on a vast scale, and with its eleven phrases demonstrates in 
detail  as  clearly  as  the  sun  both  eleven  proofs  of  the  Divine  necessary  existence  and 
dominical  unity,  and  eleven  good  tidings.  According  to  one  narration,  it  bears  the 
Greatest  Name.  But  then  it  was  suddenly  imparted  to  me  that  I  should  teach  this 
concise summary to Nadir Hoja and the youths here. So saying: “In the name of God,” 
I began: 

This sentence demonstrating Divine unity contains eleven good tidings and eleven 
proofs  of  the  truths  of  belief.  For  now,  I  shall  point  out  briefly  the  proofs  only  and 
refer their further explanation and the good tidings to the Twentieth Letter and other 
parts of the Risale-i Nur. However, I  

                                             

3 Bukhari, Adhan, 155; Tahajjud, 21; ‘Umra, 12; Jihad, 133; Bad’ al-Khalq, 11; Maghazi, 29; 
Da’wat, 18, 52; Riqaq, 11; I’tisam, 3; Muslim, Dhikr. 28, 30, 74, 75, 76; Witr, 24; Jihad, 158; Adab, 
101; Tirmidhi, Mawaqit, 108; Hajj, 104; Da’wat, 35, 36; Nasa’i, Sahw, 83-6; Manasik, 163, 170; 
Iman, 12; Ibn Maja, Tijara 40; Manasik, 84; Adab, 58; Du’a, 10, 14, 16; Abu Da’ud, Manasik, 56; 
Darimi, Salat, 88, 90; Manasik, 34; Isti’dhan, 53, 57; Muwatta, Hajj, 127, 243; Qur’an, 20, 22; 
Musnad, i, 47; ii, 5; iii, 320; iv, 4; v, 191; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, i, 538. 

 

571

cconsider  it  appropriate  to  write  here  a  few  points  I  did  not  tell  them  when  I  was 
writing the lesson. Of the eleven phrases of the above sentence affirming Divine unity: 

THE FIRST PHRASE: ‘There is no god but God’ 

The proof here is the treatise called The Supreme Sign (Âyetü’l-Kübra), which has 
been  printed.  It  was  because  it  is  a  matchless  wonder  that  in  giving  news  of  various 
parts of the Risale-i Nur, Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) said: “And by the 
Supreme  Sign  preserve  me  from  sudden  death,”  and  making  that  Supreme  Sign  an 
intercessor,  through  the  treatise’s  victories  in  the  Courts  of  both  Ankara and Denizli 
and  its  spreading  effectively and secretly, it was both the reason for the Risale-i Nur 
students  being  acquitted,  and  since  its  secret  printing  had  led  to  the  students’ 
imprisonment  for  nine  months,  it  both  clearly  affirmed  Imam  ‘Ali’s  (May  God  be 
pleased with him) wondrous prediction, and his prayer for the Risale-i Nur students.  

Yes,  the  Seventh  Ray,  The Supreme Sign, points out thirty-three vast, universal, 
unanimous  proofs  in  all  beings.  Alluding  to  innumerable  evidences  in  each  universal 
proof,  it  proves  firstly  that  heavens  indicate  the  Necessarily Existent One’s existence 
and unity with the words of the stars; the earth with the phrases and sentences of the 
animals and plants; and so on, until the universe as a whole, with the words of all its 
contents  and  beings,  and  the  truths  of  contingency  and  createdness  and  change  —  it 
proves  them  as  clearly  as  sunlight  and  as  certainly  as  the  day.  Those  who  want 
unshakeable  belief  and  seek  an  unbreakable  sword  to  combat  irreligion  and  anarchy 
should refer to The Supreme Sign. 

THE SECOND PHRASE: ‘He is One’ 

A concise indication of the proof in this phrase is as follows: 
In  every  aspect  of  the  universe  a  unity,  a  oneness,  is  apparent.  For  example,  it 
displays  a  unity  and  oneness  by  being  a  well  set-out  city,  a  magnificent  palace,  a 
meaningful,  materialized  book,  and  an  embodied  Qur’an  every verse, and even every 
letter  and  point  of  which  is  miraculous.  Similarly,  since  the  palace’s  lamp  is  one and 
the  same,  and  its  calendar-lamp,  and  fiery  cook,  and  water-bearing  sponges,  and 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  other  things  it  contains  are  all  one and the same, it proves 
decisively  that  the  owner,  ruler,  scribe,  and  author  of  the  palace,  city,  book,  and 
mighty embodied Qur’an is existent, one, and single. 

 

572

THE THIRD PHRASE: ‘He has no partner’ 

A brief indication of the proof in this is as follows: 
The source, master, and basis of The Supreme Sign is the sublime verse: 

Say:  if  there  had  been  [other]  gods  with  Him  —as  they say—  behold,  they 
would certainly have sought out a way to the Lord of the Throne! [to the end 
of the verse],4  

which is also called The Supreme Sign. That is, if God had any partners and others had 
intervened  in  creation  and  interfered  in  His  dominicality,  the  order  of  the  universe 
would  have  been  spoilt.”  However,  the  perfect  order  in  everything,  small  and  large, 
particular and universal, from the wing of the tiniest fly and the cell of the pupil of the 
eye  to  the  numberless  birds  which  fly  through  the  air  and  the solar system, furnishes 
indubitable  and  decisive  evidence  for  the  impossibility  and  non-existence of any such 
partners.  It  also  testifies  self-evidently  to  the  existence  and  unity  of  the  Necessarily 
Existent One. 

THE FOURTH PHRASE: ‘His is the dominion’ 

A concise indication of the lengthy proof contained in this phrase: 
We  see  that  behind  the  veil  One  of  boundless  power  and  knowledge  makes  the 
face of the earth into an arable field, and every spring sows in it all mixed up together 
the  seeds  of  a  hundred  thousand  species  of  plants.  Then  in  perfect  order  without 
confusing any of their crops, He raises them and with the hand of mercy and wisdom, 
out  of  them  distributes  to  the  two  hundred  thousand  animal  species  their  sustenance 
and  rations  according  to  need.  He  performs  these  acts  of  disposal  in  His  vast,  rich 
dominions, especially on the face of the earth. Those, then, who do not recognize that 
All-Wise  Disposer  and  Compassionate  Owner  are  compelled  to  deny  the  earth 
together with its produce, like the foolish Sophists. 

THE FIFTH PHRASE: ‘His is the praise’ 

This is a very brief indication to the very extensive proof contained in this phrase: 
Yes, we see with our eyes and understand clearly with our minds that this city of 
the  universe,  quarter  of  the  earth,  and  barracks  of  men  and  animals  is  governed, 
supervised, and maintained by an All-Compassionate Provider, a Munificent Provider 
of Bounties. For in order to have His bounties praised and thanked for, He makes the 
earth into a merchant ship  

                                             

4 Qur’an, 17:42. 

 

573

and  railway  train  bringing  provender,  and  the  spring  into  a  waggon  filled  with  a 
hundred  thousand  sorts  of  foods  and  packets  of  conserves  called  breasts,  conveying 
them  to  the  needy  living  creatures  whose  rations  have  been  exhausted  at  the  end  of 
winter. Anyone with an iota of intelligence would agree that this was the work of an 
All-Compassionate Provider. While one who does not affirm it and deviates into denial 
is a foolish, harmful animal since he is then obliged to deny all the regular bounties and 
specific foods on the face of the earth, which are the cause of praise and thanks. 

THE SIXTH PHRASE: ‘He gives life’ 

An extremely brief allusion to the proof in this phrase: 
Yes,  it  is  proved  in  the  Tenth  Word  and  in  other  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  that 
every spring on the face of the earth a glorious army is raised to life which consists of 
three hundred thousand species of living beings of infinite variety. With its innumerable 
members,  all  of  whose  lives  and  necessities  are  given  them  with  perfect  order  and 
regularity,  it  displays  a  hundred  thousand  samples,  indeed,  signs,  of  the  supreme 
resurrection  of  the  dead.  All  those  innumerable  different  creatures  which  are 
intermingled  and  mixed  up  together  are  raised  to  life  in  perfect  balance  and  order 
without  error,  mistake,  or  deficiency,  with  none  being  confused,  disarranged,  or 
forgotten.  Those  hundreds  of  thousands  of  animal  species  with  their  uncountable 
members,  which  all  differ  as  regards  their forms, art, and livelihoods, are resurrected 
from  droplets  of  fluid  called  sperm  which  is  all  similar,  from  seeds  resembling  earth, 
from tiny grains which differ little from one another, from the tiny eggs of flies which 
are all similar, and the birds from the same air and from fluid and eggs which are either 
the same as or only a little different from each other. The person, therefore, who does 
not  conclude  that  it  is  an  Ever-Living  and  Self-Subsistent  One,  an  All-Knowing, 
Creative  Giver  of  Life  Who  writes  out  on  the  page  of  the  earth  and  the  spring  a 
hundred  thousand  different  books,  all  together,  one  within  the  other,  without  error, 
perfectly,  is  surely  compelled  to  deny  both  himself  and  all  the  living  creatures 
throughout the earth, in all the springs attached to the string of time, and on the faces 
of  the  living  earth  and  space,  and  must  himself  be  the  most  foolish  and  wretched  of 
living creatures. 

THE SEVENTH PHRASE: ‘And deals death’ 

A very brief indication of the proof contained in this phrase: 
In  the  autumn  when  the  three  hundred  thousand  species  of  living  creatures  are 

being discharged from their duties under the name of death, the  

 

574

registers  and  pages  of  the  actions  of  each  species  and  all  their  members,  and  the 
indexes of all they have done, and the lists of all they will do the following spring, and 
their seeds, which are spirits of a sort, are all entrusted in their places to the hand of 
wisdom of the All-Glorious Preserver. The person, therefore, who does not recognize 
that  All-Wise  Creator,  the  Ever-Living  and  Undying  One,  Who  inscribes  in  the 
miniscule seeds of the fig-tree, each of which is like an immortal spirit and bears all the 
laws  governing  the  tree’s  life,  the  story  of  the  tree’s  life,  which  contains  writing 
enough to fill a book, thus making it like a large volume — such a person is certainly 
not even an idiot and delirious animal, but more abject than the devils who stoke the 
fires of Hell, and will be condemned to eternal death. 

Yes, just as it is a hundredfold impossibility and futility that the above universal, 
comprehensive,  wise,  purposive  acts,  which  comprise  numberless  wonders  and 
miracles  and  point  to  the  proofs  of  these  Phrases,  should  be  without  the  one  who 
performed  them;  so  too,  to  attribute  them  to  blind,  impotent,  unconscious,  deaf, 
lifeless,  confused,  disorderly,  overwhelming  causes  is  impossible,  precluded  and 
unjustifiable  a  thousand  times  over.  For  if  that  was  the  case,  every  particle  of  earth 
would  have  to  possess  an  infinite  power  and  wisdom,  and  a  wondrous,  universal 
craftsmanship so that it could give form to all the plants and flowers; and as it says in 
the  piece  about  the  air  in  A  Guide  For  Youth,  every  molecule  of  air  would  have  to 
possess  the  ability  to  know  all  speech  and  all  the  words  spoken  on  the  radio  and 
telephone,  and  to  teach  them  to  the  other  molecules.  No  satan  even  could  make 
anyone accept such an extraordinary idea. The penalty for unbelief and denial, which is 
thus far from reason and reality and constitutes insult and aggression against all beings, 
could only be a terrible Hell, which is pure justice. We should surely declare in the face 
of such disbelievers: “Long live Hell!” 

THE EIGHTH PHRASE: ‘And He is living and dies not’ 

An extremely brief indication of the proof in this phrase is this: 
For example, on the disappearance of the tiny suns reflected in the bubbles on the 
surface  of  a  choppy  sea  or  flowing  river,  the  bubbles  that  replace  them  display  the 
same tiny suns, thus pointing to the sun in the sky and testifying  to it, and with their 
disappearance  and  death  they  indicate the existence of a perpetual sun. Similarly, the 
creatures  on  the  surface  of  the  constantly  changing  sea  of  the  universe,  and  ever-
renewed, infinite space, in the arable field of minute particles, and in the river of time, 
which  with  its  flow  draws  all  transitory  beings  into  its  embrace,  continuously  and 
speedily flow on and depart, and their apparent causes  

 

575

die along with them. Every day, every year, a universe dies and a new one replaces it. 
Since  the  crops  of  travelling  worlds  and  flowing  universes  are  continuously  reaped 
from  the  field  of  particles,  certainly  just  as  the  bubbles  and  tiny  suns  point  to  a 
perpetual  sun  with  their  passage,  so  the  deaths  of  those  numberless  creatures  and 
endless  crops,  and  their  being  discharged  in  perfect  orderliness  together  with  their 
apparent causes, testify with the clarity and certainty of daylight, indeed, of the sun, to 
the  necessary  existence  and  being  and  unity  of  an  Ever-Living  Undying  One,  an 
Eternal  Sun,  an  Enduring  Creator,  a  Most  Pure  and  Holy  Commander.  All  beings 
testify  to these a thousand  times more clearly  and  definitely than the existence of the 
universe. 

Now  you  have  certainly  understood  just  how  deaf,  foolish,  and  offensive  is 
someone  who  does  not  hear  these  loud  voices  and  powerful  testimonies  that  fill the 
universe, nor heeds them. 

THE NINTH PHRASE: ‘In His hand is all good’ 

A brief indication of the proof contained in this phrase is as follows: 
We  see  that  each  sphere  of  the  universe,  each  realm  of  being,  each  level,  each 
individual  and  member,  and  even  each  cell  of  each  body  possesses  a  store  or  depot 
containing its reserve supplies of sustenance, an arable field or treasury producing and 
preserving all its necessities. For at exactly the right time, in perfect order and balance, 
with  perfect  wisdom  and  graciousness,  all  their  necessities  are  given  to  those  needy 
beings by a hidden hand, outside their power and will.  

For example, mountains contain all the minerals and chemicals necessary for man 
and  living  beings,  and  the  things  necessary  for  life;  on  someone’s  command  and 
through  his  planning,  they  are  perfect  stores  and  treasuries.  Similarly,  through  the 
power  of  an  All-Wise  Provider,  the  earth  is  an  arable  field,  a  harvest,  a  kitchen, 
producing  with  perfect  order and  regularity  the  sustenance  of  all  those  living beings. 
Even,  just  as  human  beings  and  all  their  bodily  members  have  treasuries  and  stores, 
and  the  cells  of  their  bodies  have  tiny  depots;  so  it  goes  on,  till  the  world  of  the 
hereafter, a store of which is this world; and an arable field and store of Paradise are 
the world of Islam  and  true humanity, which produce the good, beauty, and lights of 
this world; and one storehouse of Hell are the filthy matters and groups of this world, 
which  come  from  non-existence,  which  is  evil,  and  yield  the  produce  of  evils,  ugly 
things, and disbelief, and which pollute the worlds of existence, which are good. And 
the store of the stars’ heat is Hell, while the treasury of lights is a Paradise. Alluding to 
all those infinite treasuries, the phrase ‘In His hand is all good,’ then, demonstrates a 
most brilliant proof. 

 

576

Yes, this phrase, together with the phrase, ‘In His hand are the keys of all things,’ 
points out to anyone not totally blind an infinitely extensive, wondrous proof of Divine 
dominicality and unity. For example, consider only the following out of those endless 
treasuries and stores: just as with his command of “Awake!” and the key of His will, 
an All-Wise Disposer Who holds the keys of seeds and grains, which are all tiny stores 
containing  the  members  and  destinies  of  huge  trees  or  shining  flowers,  opens  up  in 
perfect  balance  and  order  the  minute  door  of  a  seed;  so  too  throwing  open  with the 
key of the rain the  treasury of the earth, without error He opens all the seeds, which 
are  the  tiny  stores and seminal fluid of plants, as well as the storehouses of droplets, 
which receive the command to develop and are the origin of animals, and the seminal 
fluid composed of water and air of birds and flying insects. If you want to understand 
and  see  that  He  opens  up  with  the  hand  of  wisdom,  will,  mercy,  and  choice,  all  the 
treasuries  and  depots,  physical  and  non-physical,  universal  and  particular,  in  the 
universe, each with its particular key, consider your own heart, mind, body, stomach, 
and garden, and the spring, which is the flower of the earth, and its flowers and fruits, 
for  they  are  all  opened  up  by  a hidden hand, with perfect order, balance, mercy, and 
wisdom, with all different keys which come from the workbench of “Be! And it is.”5 
That hidden hand draws out pounds of foods from a minute box weighing less than an 
ounce, and sometimes hundreds of pounds, and presents them to living creatures as a 
feast.  Is  it  at  all  possible  that  blind  force,  deaf  nature,  aimless  chance,  or  lifeless, 
ignorant,  impotent  causes  could  interfere  in  such  a  boundless  orderly,  knowing,  and 
percipient act, in such totally wise, purposive art in which no chance played any part, 
in such error-free perfectly balanced disposals, and in such completely just dominicality 
which  is  free  of  all  tryanny?  Could  any  being  who  does  not  see  and  administer  all 
beings together at once, nor holds under his command minute particles together with 
the planets and stars, intervene in this disposal and government which is in every way 
wise, purposeful, miraculous, and balanced? 

As  the  verse,  Well-nigh  bursting  with  fury6  states, Hell  rages  at the person who 
does not recognize the All-Compassionate Disposer, the All-Wise Sustainer, in Whose 
hand is all good and Who holds the keys of all things, and deviates into denial; it boils 
up  in  fury,  saying  through  the  tongue  of  disposition:  “He  deserves  my  boundless 
torments and is in no way worthy of compassion.” 

                                             

5 Qur’an, 2:117, etc. 
6 Qur’an, 67:8. 

 

577

THE TENTH PHRASE: ‘And He is powerful over all things’ 

An extremely concise indication of the proof contained in this phrase is as follows: 
As  soon  as  every  conscious  creature  who  comes  into  this  guest-house  of  the 
world opens his eyes, he sees that a power holds in its grasp the whole universe, and 
within  that  power  are  a  pre-eternal,  all-embracing  knowledge  which  never  confuses 
anything  and  a  most  precise  wisdom  and  favour  which  never  act  purposelessly  or 
without  balance.  Just  as,  spinning  a  single  particle  from  the  army  of  particles  like  a 
Mevlevi dervish in ecstasy, it employs it in numerous duties; so at the same time and 
according  to  the  same  law,  it  causes  the  globe  of  the  earth  to  travel  a  twenty-four 
thousand-year-distance in a year, again like an ecstatic Mevlevi. At the same time and 
according to same law, through which it sends to men and the animals the produce of 
the  seasons,  it  makes  the  sun  into  a  shuttle  or  spinning-wheel,  and  spinning  it 
ecstatically  so  it  exerts  an  attraction,  it  employs  the  planets,  the  army  of  the  solar 
system, in various duties in perfect order and balance. At the same time and according 
to the same law of wisdom, that same power writes one within the other, without error 
or confusion, hundreds of thousands of species, which resemble books, on the page of 
the face of the earth, and displays thousands of samples of the supreme resurrection of 
the  dead.  That  same  power  at  the  same  time  transforms  the  page  of  the  atmosphere 
into a slate for writing and erasing. Employing all its particles, which are like the nibs 
of pens or the points of the book, in the tasks specified for them by will and command, 
it  endows  all  of  them  with  such  ability  that  each  receives  all  words  and  speech  as 
though  it  knows  them,  and  broadcasts  them  without  confusion.  It employs each as a 
miniscule  ear  and  tiny  tongue,  proving  that  the  element  of air is a ‘throne’ of Divine 
will and command. 

Thus,  according  to  this  brief  indication,  the  one  who  makes  the  universe  into  a 
well-ordered  city,  a  first-class  apartment-building  and  guest-house,  and  a  miraculous 
book  and  Qur’an,  and  holds  in  His  grasp  with  the  balance  of  knowledge  and 
arrangements  of  wisdom  all  the  levels,  realms,  and  groups  of  creatures  from  the 
universe  as  a  whole  to  minute  particles,  and  disposes  of  them,  is  Most-Merciful  and 
Compassionate.  So  the  person  who  does  not  recognize  that  Most  Merciful  and 
Compassionate One, Who demonstrates as clearly as the sun and daylight His wisdom 
and  mercy  within  His  power,  and  makes  known  His  existence  and  unity  within  His 
absolute dominicality, thus wanting recognition through belief in return for His making 
these  known,  and  love  through  worship  in  return  for  His  making  Himself  loved, and 
thanks and praise in return for His  

 

578

bounties — the satans in human form who do not recognize Him, or try to love Him 
through worship, in fact foster a sort of enmity towards Him through denial, and are 
each minor Nimrods and Pharaohs, and are certainly deserving of infinite torment. 

THE ELEVENTH PHRASE: ‘And to Him is your return’ 

This means to say: just as beings will depart for His presence, going to the eternal 
world,  the  hereafter,  and  the  everlasting  realm  of  happiness;  so  it  is  He  Who  is  the 
place of recourse of all the creatures in the universe. All the chains of causes are based 
on  Him  and  rest  on  His  power.  They  are  all  merely  veils  for  the  disposals  of  His 
power. All apparent causes are only screens for preserving the dignity and majesty of 
His  sacred  power.  They  have  no  effect  whatsoever in  creation.  If  it  was  not  for  His 
will  and  command,  nothing,  not  even  a  particle,  could  move  or  act.  A  very  brief 
indication of the proof contained in this phrase is as follows: 

Firstly:  We  refer  to  the  Tenth  Word  and  its  addenda,  the  Twenty-Ninth  Word, 
the  Seventh  Topic  of  The  Fruits  of  Belief,  the  Third  Ray, and to the treatises of the 
Risale-i  Nur  about  belief,  the  proof,  leading  to  completely  certain  belief,  that  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead  will  occur  and  the  hereafter  and  eternal  life  will  be  brought 
about  as  indubitably  and  definitely  as the coming spring, as this sacred phrase states. 
Truly,  those  treatises  have  proved  this  pillar  of  belief  in  such  a  way  with  so  many 
evidences that they compel even the most obdurate deniers to affirm that the existence 
of the hereafter is as certain as the existence of this world. 

Secondly:  One  third  of  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  looks  to  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead  and  the  hereafter,  and  it  constructs  all  its  claims  on  them. 
Since  this  is  so,  all  the  miracles  and  evidences  proving  the  Qur’an’s  veracity  also 
indicate the existence of the hereafter. Similarly, all the miracles bearing witness to the 
prophethood of Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), and all the evidences 
of  his  prophethood,  and  all  the  proofs  of  his  truthfulness,  testify  also  to  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead  and  the  hereafter.  For  just  as throughout  his  life,  one  of his 
most constant calls concerned the hereafter, so all the twenty-four thousand prophets 
(Peace  be  upon  them)  taught  eternal  life  and  everlasting  happiness,  giving  the  glad 
tidings to mankind, and proving them with innumerable miracles and certain evidences. 
Since this is so, all the miracles and evidences proving their prophethood and veracity 
testified to the hereafter and eternal life, which was their constant and most important 
teaching.  Making  an  analogy  with  this,  all  the  evidences  proving  the  other  pillars  of 
belief testify also to the resurrection of the dead and the throwing open of the realm of 
bliss. 

 

579

Thirdly:  In  order  to  display  His  perfections  and  His  power  and  dominicality,  an 
All-Glorious  Maker,  a  Beauteous  Maker,  an  All-Perfect  Allah  creates  the  universe 
together  with  all  its  atoms,  planets,  parts,  and  levels.  With  perfect  wisdom  He 
continuously makes each being work at a task, indeed, at numerous tasks, and in order 
to  display  the  eternal,  endless  manifestations  of  His  Names,  He  sends  caravan  after 
caravan,  indeed,  world  after  travelling  renewed  world,  and  the  tribes  of  creatures  to 
the  guest-house  of  this  world  and the arena of trial which is worldly life. He records 
for the cinemas of the hereafter set up in the World of Similitudes, with the cameras of 
the Intermediate Realm, all their images, deeds, and circumstances, and after releasing 
them from their duties, sends other tribes, caravans, and flowing, travelling worlds to 
the arena in order to perform those duties and be mirrors to the manifestations of His 
Names.  Is  it  therefore  at  all  possible  that  there  should  be  no  realm  of  reward  and 
punishment,  no  resurrection  of  the  dead  and  last  judgement  for  men,  who  with 
consciousness  and  intelligence  respond  in  this  fleeting  world  to  all  the  aims  of  the 
Creator,  loving  Him  with  all  their  capacity  and  making  Him  love  them;  recognizing 
Him  and  making  Him  known;  beseeching  with  endless  supplications  everlasting 
happiness in the hereafter; and since, possessing intelligence, they suffer infinite pains, 
they  long  for  eternal  life,  which  is  pure  pleasure,  with  all  their  beings,  spirits,  and 
capacities? God forbid! A hundred thousand times, God forbid! 

Since these brief indications are proved and explained brilliantly, powerfully and in 

detail in the Risale-i Nur, we refer you to that and here cut this long story short. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.7 

                                             

7 Qur’an, 2:32. 

 

580

A Brief Summary of Sura al-Fatiha 

[Part Two of the only lesson I gave after having been transferred temporarily 
from  solitary confinement in the third ‘School of Joseph’ to the company of 
others.] 

This is a short sample of the lessons given to the Risale-i Nur students in prison: 
While  reciting  Sura  al-Fatiha  during  the  prayers,  it  commanded  me  to  expound 
one drop from its ocean and a single flash from the seven colours in the light of its sun. 
For  sure  we  had  written  some  very  sweet  and  agreeable  points  from  this  sacred 
treasury in part of the Twenty-Ninth Letter, particularly in the journey of imagination 
taken in “the Nun of na‘budu,” and the Eight Symbols (Rumuz-u Semaniye), and the 
Qur’anic  commentary  Signs  of  Miraculousness  (Ishârâtü’l-I’caz),  and  in  other  parts 
of the Risale-i Nur, but I felt obliged to write down my reflections during the prayers, 
but  only  the  allusions  to  the  pillars  of  belief  and  their  proofs  from  that  very  sweet 
Qur’anic  summary,  in  the  form  of  a  concise  extract  and  in  the  manner  of  Part  One 
above. So referring the phrase In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate 
to two or three treatises of the Risale-i Nur, I am starting from All praise be to God: 

the  Sustainer  of 

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Merciful,  the  Compassionate.  *  All  praise  be  to 
the 
God, 
Compassionate;  *  Owner  of  the  Day  of  Judgement;  *  You  alone  do  we 
worship  and  from  You  alone  do  we  seek  help;  *  Guide  us  to  the  Straight 
Path;  *  The  path  of  those  whom  You  have  blessed,  not  those  who  have 
received Your anger, nor those who have gone astray.8 

the  Worlds.  *  The  Merciful, 

the  All 

FIRST PHRASE: ‘All praise be to God’ 

A very brief allusion to the proof of the truths of belief in this phrase. 
Filling  the  face  of  the  earth,  indeed,  the  universe,  are  intentional  bestowals  and 
bounties,  which  are  the  cause  of  praise  and  thanks,  especially  the  sending  of  pure, 
clean,  nutritious  milk  to  infants  from  between blood and excrement; so too are there 
purposeful gifts and presents, and kindly benefactions and feasts. The price of these is 
to say “In the Name of God” at the start, “All praise be to God” at the end, and in the 
middle to perceive the bestowal in the bounty, and through it to recognize your  

                                             

8 Qur’an, 1:1-7. 

 

581

Sustainer. Consider your own self, your stomach, and your senses! How many things 
and bounties they need!  See how many foods and delights they want for the price of 
praise  and  thanks,  then  compare  all  living  creatures  with  yourself.  Thus,  the  endless 
praise offered verbally and through tongues of disposition in response to these general 
bestowals shows as clearly as the sun the existence and universal dominicality of One 
Who is Worshipped and Praised, an All-Compassionate Bestower of Bounties. 

SECOND PHRASE: ‘The Sustainer of All the Worlds’ 

A very short allusion to the proof contained in this phrase: 
We  see  with  our  eyes that within the universe are not thousands, but millions of 
worlds, small universes,  mostly one within the other. Although the conditions for the 
administration  and  running  of  these  are  all  different,  they  are  organized,  maintained, 
and  administered  so  perfectly  that  like  a  single  page  held  constantly  in  view  the 
universe is renewed and changed, and like a line, each of all those worlds is written by 
a  pen  of  power  and  determining.  Every  instant  attestations,  particular  and  universal, 
are  made,  boundless,  unending testimonies to the number of minute particles and the 
beings formed of them, to the necessary existence and unity of a Sustainer of All the 
Worlds  who  administers  these  millions  of  worlds  and  travelling  universes  with  an 
infinite  knowledge,  wisdom,  and  limitless  all-embracing  mercy  within  an  infinite 
dominicality.  Not  to  affirm,  perceive,  understand  or  see  a  dominicality  which  raises 
and administers with the same law, the same dominicality, the same wisdom, all beings 
from the arable field of particles to the solar system and the Milky Way, and from the 
cells of the body to the storehouse of the earth, to the universe in its entirety, certainly 
makes a person deserving of endless torment, and negates his worthiness to be pitied. 

THIRD PHRASE: ‘The Merciful, the Compassionate’ 

An extremely brief allusion to the proof in this phrase: 
Yes,  the  existence  and  reality  of  a  boundless  mercy  is  as  clearly  apparent  in  the 
universe  as  the  light  of  the  sun.  As  certainly  as  light  testifies  to  the  sun,  so  this 
extensive mercy testifies to a Most Merciful and Compassionate One behind the veil of 
the  Unseen.  An  important  part  of  mercy  being  sustenance,  that  mercy  is  signified  by 
the Name of Provider. As for sustenance, it points to an All-Compassionate Provider 
so  clearly  that  anyone  with  an  iota  of  intelligence  is  compelled  to  affirm  Him.  For 
example,  He  sends  food  to  all  living  beings,  particularly  to  the  helpless  and  young, 
throughout the earth and the atmosphere, in truly wondrous  

 

582

fashion beyond their wills and power, from seeds, droplets of fluid, and grains of earth 
which all resemble each other. He makes the hen-birds search out the food and bring it 
their  wingless,  frail  chicks in the nests at the tops of trees. He subjugates the hungry 
lioness to her cubs, so she does not eat the meat she finds but gives it them. He sends 
the pleasant, nutritious, pure, white milk, like the water of Kawthar, from the springs 
of  breasts  to  the  infants  of  humans  and  young  of  other  animals,  without  it  being 
polluted by red blood and filthy excrement, sending also their mothers’ tenderness to 
assist  them.  Then  just  as  in  truly  wondrous  fashion  He  causes  the  appropriate 
sustenance  to  hasten  to  all  the  trees,  which  need  a  sort  of  food,  so  He  bestows  an 
extensive table of foods on man’s senses, which require sustenance physical and non-
physical,  and  on  his  mind,  heart,  and  spirit.  It  is  as  though  the  universe  consists  of 
hundreds of thousands of laden tables of every different kind and sort, all enfolded one 
within  the  other  like  the  petals  of  the  rose  and  shirts  of  the  maize  cob.  With  a 
multitude of various tongues, particular and universal, to the number of tables and the 
foods they bear and their bounties, these point out to everyone who is not completely 
blind a Most Merciful Provider, an All-Compassionate and Munificent One. 

If  it  is said: The calamities,  ugliness, and evils in this world are contrary to that 

all-embracing mercy, and spoil it. 

The Answer: This question has been answered completely satisfactorily in various 
parts of the Risale-i Nur such as the Treatise On Divine Determining. Referring you to 
them, here we make only a brief allusion, as follows: 

All the elements, all the realms of beings, and all creatures, have numerous duties, 
particular  and  universal,  and  each  of  those  duties  yields  numerous  results  and  fruits. 
For  the  most  part these are beneficial, beautiful, good, and are mercy. Only a few of 
them  encounter  those  lacking  ability,  those  who  act  wrongly,  or  those  who  deserve 
punishment and disciplining, or those who will be the means of producing many shoots 
of  good.  An  apparent,  minor  evil  is  ugliness;  it  is  apparently  unkind.  But  if  for  that 
minor  evil  not to  occur,  the  element  and  universal  being  is prevented by mercy from 
performing its duty, then all its other good and beautiful results would not come into 
existence. Since the non-existence of a good is evil and the spoiling of beauty is ugly, 
evils,  ugliness,  and  pitilessness  would  occur  to  the  number  of  those  results.  Thus, 
hundreds of evil and instances of unkindness would be perpetrated just so that one evil 
would not occur, which would be entirely contrary to wisdom, benefit, and the mercy 
of  dominicality.  For  example,  things  like  snow,  cold,  fire,  and  rain  have  hundreds  of 
benefits and purposes. If through their  

 

583

own  choice  careless  or  imprudent  people  harm  themselves,  for  instance  if  they  put 
their hands in the fire and say there is no mercy in its creation, the innumerable good, 
beneficial, merciful uses of fire will give them the lie, and hit them in the mouth. 

Moreover,  man’s  selfish  desires  and  lowly  emotions,  which  are  blind  to 
consequences,  cannot  be  the  criteria,  measure,  or  balance  of  the  laws  of  mercy, 
sovereignty,  and  dominicality  which  are  in  force  in  the  universe.  He  sees  things 
according  to  the  colour  of  his  own  mirror.  A  black-hearted,  cruel  person  sees  the 
universe  as  weeping,  ugly,  dark,  and  tyrannical.  But  if  he  looks  through  the  eye  of 
belief,  he  sees  a  macroanthropos  clothed  in  seventy  thousand  beautiful  garments one 
over  the  other,  sewn  of  instances  of  mercy,  good,  and  wisdom.  Like  a  houri  of 
Paradise  dressed  in  seventy  fine  garments,  it  is  always  laughing,  smiling  with  mercy. 
He will observe that mankind within it is a miniature universe, and each individual man 
a microcosm. He will exclaim with all his heart and spirit: 

“All  praise  be  to  God,  the  Sustainer  of  All  the  Worlds  *  The  Merciful,  the 
Compassionate. * Owner of the Day of Judgement!” 

FOURTH PHRASE: ‘Owner of the Day of Judgement’ 

A very concise indication of the proof contained in this phrase: 
Firstly:  All  the  evidences  which  testify  to  the  proof  of  ‘And  to  Him  is  your 
return,’ and to the resurrection of the dead and hereafter at the end of the Part One of 
this  lesson,  testify  to  the  extensive  truth  of  belief  which  ‘Owner  of  the  Day  of 
Judgement’ indicates. 

Secondly:  As  is  said  at  the  end  of  the  Tenth  Word,  just  as  the  eternal 
dominicality,  mercy,  and  wisdom  of  the  universe’s  Maker,  and  his  pre-eternal  and 
post-eternal  beauty,  glory,  and  perfection,  and  His  endless  other  attributes  and 
hundreds  of  Names  certainly  require  the  hereafter;  so  does  the  Qur’an  testify  to  the 
abode  of  the  hereafter  with  thousands  of  its  verses  and  proofs,  as  does  Muhammad 
(Peace and blessings be upon him) with his hundreds of miracles and evidences, and all 
the  prophets (Peace  be  upon them) and the revealed books and scriptures, with  their 
innumerable evidences. The person, therefore, who does not believe in the everlasting 
life  of  the  hereafter  casts  himself  into  a  sort  of  Hell  in  this  world,  arising  from  his 
unbelief, and suffers constant torment. As is described in A Guide For Youth, through 
their  death  and  parting,  all  the  past  and  the  future  and  creatures  and  universes 
continuously  rain  down  endless  pains  on  his  spirit  and  heart,  making  him  suffer  the 
torments of Hell before going there. 

 

584

Thirdly:  ‘The  Day  of  Judgement’ (Yawm al-Din) alludes to a vast and powerful 
proof  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  but  a  situation  has  arisen  here  causing  the 
postponement of that proof to another time. Perhaps too, no need remains for it. For 
various  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  have  proved  with  hundreds  of  powerful  arguments 
that  the  morning  and  spring of the resurrection  of the dead  and Great Gathering will 
occur as certainly as day follows night and spring follows winter. 

FIFTH PHRASE: ‘You alone do we worship and from You alone do we seek help.’ 

It  occurred  to  me  that  before  pointing  out  the  proof  contained  in  this  phrase,  I 
should relate a true journey of the imagination which is described in the Twenty-Ninth 
Letter. It was like this:  

As  is  explained  in  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  especially  in  the  Qur’anic  commentary, 
Signs  of  Miraculousness  (Isharat  al-I‘jaz)  and  The  Eight  Symbols  (Rumûz-u 
Semâniye), one time when I was seeking out the Qur’an’s miracles I found four or five 
miraculous predictions at the end of Sura al-Fath and an historical miracle in the verse: 
This  day  We  shall  save  you  in  your  body,9  and  even  flashes  of  miraculousness  in 
numerous other words and sometimes miraculous points in letters. Then, when reciting 
Sura al-Fatiha during the prayers, a question occurred to me in order to inform me of a 
miracle  in  the  Nun  of  na‘budu  and  nasta‘in  ([You  alone]  do  we  worship  [and  from 
You alone] do we seek help). 

Why  was  it  not  “You  alone  do  I  worship  and  from  You  alone  do  I  seek  help,” 
rather  than  the  first  person  plural,  that  is,  “We  worship  You and We seek help from 
You”?  Suddenly  the  broad  arena  of  a  journey  of the  imagination  opened  up  through 
the door of that  “Nun” (we). I understood experientially the mighty mystery and vast 
benefits  of  praying  in  congregation,  and  that  this  single  letter  is  a  miracle,  and  I 
actually saw this. It was as follows: 

At that time while performing the prayers in Bayezid Mosque in Istanbul, I said: 
“You  alone  do  we  worship  and  from  You  alone  do  we  seek  help.”  I  looked  and saw 
that  the  congregation  in  the  mosque  was  saying  “Guide  us!”  the  same  as  me;  its 
members were all participating in my supplication, corroborating it. Then another veil 
was drawn back. I saw that all the mosques in Istanbul had as though become a huge 
Bayezid Mosque. All their congregations were exclaiming: “You alone do we worship 
and from You alone do we seek help” like me, setting their seals on my assertions and 
entreaties, and saying “Amen!” to them. Then within  

                                             

9 Qur’an, 10:92. 

 

585

their  taking  on  the  form  of  intercessors  for  me,  a  further  veil  was  unfolded  in  my 
imagination. I saw that the World of Islam had assumed the form of a huge mosque, 
with Mecca and the Ka‘ba as the mihrab. The rows of all the Muslims performing the 
prayers  were  in  circles  facing  the  sacred  mihrab.  Saying  like  me  “You  alone  do  we 
worship  and  from  You  alone  do  we  seek  help  *  Guide  us...”  each  was  both 
supplicating  in  the  name  of  all,  and  testifying,  and  affirming  it;  also  making  all  the 
others  intercessors  for  himself.  Then,  when  thinking:  “What  such  a  vast  community 
claims  could  not  be  wrong  and  its  supplications  would  not  be  rejected;  it  repulses 
Satanic  doubts,”  and  when  affirming  the  vast,  self-evident  benefits  of  performing  the 
prayers in congregation, another veil was unfolded. I saw that the universe and all the 
varieties  of  creatures  were  as  though  performing  the  prayers  through  the  tongues  of 
their  beings  and  worshipping  in a  way  particular  to  each.  Responding  with extensive 
worship  to  the  all-embracing  dominicality  of  the  Glorious All-Worshipped One, each 
group affirmed the testimonies and affirmation of Divine unity of all the others. While 
observing  that  this  was  the  case  since  they  all  take  up  positions  proving  the  same 
result,  yet  another  veil  was  unfolded.  I  saw  that  just  as  the  universe,  the 
macroanthropos, exclaims: “You alone do we worship and from You alone do we seek 
help” with the tongue of disposition, and numerous of its parts declare it through the 
tongue  of  capacity  and  innate  need,  and  conscious  beings  say  it  verbally,  all  thus 
displaying  their  worship  before  the  Creator’s  compassionate  dominicality;  in  just  the 
same  way,  through  the  silent  tongue  of  need  and  submission  to  their  Creator’s 
dominicality,  all  the  particles,  powers,  and  senses  of  my  body,  like  those  of  all  my 
companions in that vast congregation, each resembling a tiny universe, declared: “You 
alone  do we worship and from You alone do we seek help.” In this way they showed 
that  they  were  acting  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  will  and  command  and  were  at 
every  instant  in  need  of  their  Creator’s  grace  and  mercy  and  assistance.  And  just  as 
entering through the door of the Nun, I had observed in wonderment both the sacred 
mystery  of  performing  the  prayers  in  congregation  and  the  beautiful  miracle  of  the 
Nun, so I went out from it. “All praise be to God!”, I exclaimed. Thereafter I became 
accustomed to reciting the verse, You alone do we worship and from You alone do we 
seek  help  on  account  of  those  three  congregations  and  those  companions,  great  and 
small. 

Now we have completed the introduction and come to our main topic, and a brief 
indication of the proof alluded to by You alone do we worship and from You alone do 
we seek help: 

Firstly: We see with our own eyes that in the universe and especially  

 

586

on  the  face  of  the  earth,  within  an  awesome,  continuous,  regular  activity  and 
creativity, a compassionate, administering absolute dominicality responds with perfect 
wisdom and favour to the pleas for help and entreaties made by act, tongue, and state, 
replying  actively  to  each.  Sound  intelligences  and  the  eye  of  belief  see  within  the 
appearance  of  this  dominicality,  the  response  of  the  manifestation  of  an  absolute 
Godhead,  an  Object of  universal  worship, to  the thousands of sorts of worship of all 
beings, particularly living beings, and the voluntary, innate worship of all the groups of 
mankind in all its varieties. All the revealed scriptures and prophets also tell of this. 

Secondly: As signified by the nun of na‘budu in the introduction above, each of 
the three congregations, and all of them, being engaged all together in their different, 
innate, voluntary worship, is without doubt a grateful response to a ‘worshippedness,’ 
and  a  boundless,  unequivocal  testimony  to  a  Most  Holy  Object  of  Worship.  As 
signified  by  the  nun  of  nasta’in,  the  three  congregations  mentioned  above,  that  is, 
every group and every individual from the totality of the universe to the congregation 
of the particles of a living body utters pleas for help and supplications both by act and 
state,  testifying  indubitably  to  the  One  Who  administers  them  compassionately  and 
hastens  to  assist  them,  and  replies to  and  accepts  their  entreaties.  For  example,  as is 
said in the Twenty-Third Word, the acceptance of the three sorts of supplications of all 
the  creatures  on  the  earth  in  a  way  which  is  truly  wondrous  and  beyond  all 
expectation, testifies definitely to a Compassionate Sustainer and Answerer of Prayer. 
Yes, before our eyes the supplications of grains and seeds to their Creator through the 
tongue of innate capacity to become shoots and trees, are accepted. Similarly, all living 
creatures seeking from someone through the tongue of innate need, their sustenance, 
which  their  hands  cannot  reach,  and  all  their  vital  necessities  and  desires,  which  are 
beyond  their  power,  testifies  clearly  to  a  Munificent  Creator  Who  before  our  eyes 
accepts  all  those  supplications  they  offer  through  the  tongue  of  innate  need,  and  at 
exactly  the  right  time  wisely  makes  strange,  unconscious  creatures  speedily  reply  to 
their calls for help. 

Thus, as in the above two paragraphs, the acceptance of the verbal supplications 
of  all  groups,  especially  the  wondrous  acceptance  of  the  prophets’  (Peace  be  upon 
them)  supplications  and  those  of  the  elite,  attest  to  the  proof  of  Divine  unity  which 
From You alone do we seek help comprises. 

 

587

SIXTH PHRASE: ‘Guide us to the Straight Path’ 

Yes, just as the shortest way among paths leading from one place to another, and 
the  shortest  of  lines  drawn  from  one  distant  point  to  another,  are  the straightest and 
most direct; in exactly the same way, the straightest and most direct of spiritual paths 
and interior ways are the shortest and easiest. For example, all the comparisons in the 
Risale-i  Nur between  the  ways  of  belief  and  unbelief  demonstrate  decisively  that  the 
way  of  belief  and  the  affirmation  of  Divine  unity  is  extremely  short,  direct,  straight, 
and  easy,  while  the  ways  of  unbelief  and  denial  are  extremely  lengthy,  difficult,  and 
dangerous.  That  is  to  say,  unbelief  and the  association  of  partners  with  God  are  not 
tenable  in  this  straight,  wise  universe,  in  which  everything is driven down the easiest 
and shortest path, and belief and the affirmation of Divine unity are as necessary and 
essential in the universe as the sun. 

Also, the most comfortable, beneficial, and the shortest and safest way in human 

morality and conduct is the way of the straight path and moderation. 

For example, if the power of reason deviates from the wisdom of the middle way 
and  the  easy,  beneficial  straight  path,  it  falls  into  either  excess  and  a  pernicious 
wiliness, or deficiency and a calamitous stupidity, and is prey to all sorts of difficulties 
on their lengthy paths. 

And  if  the  power  of  anger  does  not  follow  the  path  of  courage,  which  is  the 
middle  way,  it  descends  into  either  excess  and  a  most  injurious,  oppressive  fury  and 
arrogance, or into deficiency and an abased, painful cowardice and timidity, and as the 
penalty for the error of deviating from the straight path, suffers continuous torments of 
the conscience. 

And if the power of animal appetites strays from the safe middle way of chastity, it 
falls into either excess and a calamitous, shameful debauchery and immorality, or into 
deficiency  and  frigidity,  that  is,  an  inability  to  experience  pleasure,  and  suffers  the 
torments of that spiritual sickness. 

Thus, like these, in personal life and social life, in all their ways, the direct path is 
the easiest, shortest, and most beneficial. And ways other than the straight path are full 
of troubles, and are lengthy and harmful. 

That  is  to  say,  just  as  Guide  us  to  the  straight  path  is  a  comprehensive 
supplication  and  wide-reaching  worship,  so  it  indicates  a  proof  of  Divine  unity, 
instruction in wisdom, and moral training. 

 

588

SEVENTH PHRASE: ‘The path of those whom You have blessed’ 

A concise indication of the proof contained in this phrase: 
Firstly: The answer to the question of who “those” are, is the verse: 

Of the  prophets [who teach], the sincere [lovers of the truth], the witnesses 
[or martyrs] [who testify], and the righteous [who do good].10 

This  verse  lists  the  four  classes  of  mankind  who  have  received  the  bounty  of  right-
guidance. That is, with “the prophets” it indicates Muhammad (Peace and blessings be 
upon  him),  who  is  the  leader  of  the  four  classes,  with  “the  sincere  [lovers  of  the 
truth]” Abu Bakr the Veracious, and with “the witnesses [or martyrs] [who testify]” 
‘Umar,  Uthman,  and  ‘Ali  (May  God  be  pleased  with  them).  With  these  prophecies, 
that  after  the  Prophet  Muhammad  (PBUH)  and  after  Abu  Bakr,  both  ‘Umar,  and 
‘Uthman,  and  ‘Ali  would  be  both  Caliphs  and  martyrs,  this  verse  displays  a  flash  of 
miraculousness.  

Secondly:  The  truth  of  Divine  unity,  which  these  most  elevated,  most  true  and 
rightly-guided four classes of mankind have taught with all their strength since the time 
of  Adam,  with  innumerable  proofs,  miracles,  wonders,  evidences,  and  illuminations, 
and  whom the majority of mankind have affirmed, is most certainly as definite as the 
sun.  With  their  hundreds  of  thousands  of  miracles  and  proofs,  these  pre-eminent 
members of mankind have proved their veracity and truthfulness, and their consensus 
and  agreement  in  positive  matters  such  as  Divine  unity  and  the  Creator’s  necessary 
existence forms such a proof it can be in no way doubted. They are the straightest and 
the  most  veracious  and  verified  of  guides  and  the  leaders  in  perfection  among 
mankind, and man is the most important result of the universe, vicegerent of the earth, 
and  of  living  creatures  the  most  elevated  and  with  the most comprehensive capacity. 
Those  therefore  who  do  not  recognize  a  truth  upon  which  those  four  classes  have 
unanimously  agreed,  and  deny  the  truths  in  which  they  believed  unshakeably,  with 
‘absolute certainty’, ‘vision of certainty’, and ‘knowledge of certainty’, and in proof of 
which  they  put  forward  the  universe  together  with  all  its  beings,  such  deniers  surely 
perpetrate an infinite crime and are deserving of infinite punishment. 

                                             

10 Qur’an, 4:69. 

 

589

EIGHTH  PHRASE:  ‘Not  those  who  have  received  Your  wrath  nor  those  who 
have gone astray’ 

A concise indication of the proof contained in this phrase: 
Based  on  unanimous  reports,  and  universal,  certain  events  and  observations, 
human  history  and  the  sacred  revealed  scriptures relate in clear, definite fashion how 
on  thousands  of  occasions  succour  arrived  wondrously  from  the  Unseen  for  the 
prophets,  the  people  of  the straight path,  and  how what they  sought was given them 
exactly, and how on hundreds of occasions wrath and heavenly blows were visited on 
their  enemies,  the  deniers.  This  demonstrates  conclusively  and  unmistakably  that the 
universe  and  mankind  within  it  have  a  sovereign,  just,  generous,  munificent,  mighty, 
subjugating  Disposer  and  Sustainer  Who  in  various  historical  incidents  wondrously 
bestowed  victory  and  salvation  on  many  of  the  prophets  such  as  Noah,  Abraham, 
Moses, Hud, and Salih (Peace be upon them), and visited terrible heavenly calamities 
on  numerous  oppressors  and  deniers  like  the  Thamud,  ‘Ad,  and  Pharaoh,  as 
punishment in this world too for rebellion against the prophets. 

Since  the  time  of  Adam  (Peace  be  upon  him),  two  mighty  conflicting  currents 
have come down to us. One is that of the people of prophethood, righteousness, and 
belief, who, following the straight path, receive the bounty of happiness in this world 
and the next. Since they act in accordance with the true beauty, order, and perfection 
of the universe, they both receive the favours of the universe’s Owner, and experience 
happiness in this world and the next. Being the means of mankind rising to the level of 
the  angels,  or  higher,  through  the  truths  of  belief  they  attain  to  a  sort  of  Paradise  in 
this world, and to bliss in the hereafter, and they cause others to win these too. 

As for the second current, because it deviates from the straight path and through 
excess  and  deficiency  transforms  the  intelligence  into  an  instrument  of  torture 
amassing pains, it casts humanity down to a degree lower than the animals. Moreover, 
in  addition  to  receiving  the  blows  of  Divine  wrath  in  return  for  their  wrongdoing  in 
this  world,  due  to  their  intelligences,  they  see  the  universe  as  a  place  of  universal 
mourning and as the slaughterhouse of living creatures toppling over in death, and as 
exceedingly  ugly  and  confused,  thus  causing  their  consciences  to  suffer  a  perpetual 
Hell in this world and making themselves deserving of everlasting torment in the next. 

Thus, the verse, 

Not those who have received Your wrath nor those who have gone astray 

 

590

at  the  end  of  Sura  al-Fatiha  informs  us  of  these  two  mighty  currents.  It  is  also  the 
source, basis, and master of all the comparisons in the Risale-i Nur. Since the treatises 
of the Risale-i Nur expound this verse with hundreds of comparisons, we refer you to 
them for further explanation, and here suffice with this brief indication. 

NINTH PHRASE: ‘Amen’  

An extremely brief allusion to this: 
The nun in na’budu and nasta’in points out to us those three great congregations, 
particularly  the  congregations  of  those  who affirm  Divine unity in the mosque of the 
World of Islam, and especially the congregations of millions performing the prayers at 
that time, and it places us among them and opens the way for us to receive a share of 
their intercession; we too, then, through the word “Amen,” join in the supplications of 
that  congregation  of  believing  worshippers,  affirming  what  they  say,  and  offering  a 
plea  that  their  intercession  and  seeking  of  help  will  be  accepted.  It  transforms  our 
insignificant  worship,  supplications,  and  entreaties  into  universal,  extensive  worship, 
causing universal dominicality to respond to it. That is to say, through the mystery of 
the  brotherhood  of  belief  and  Islamic  unity,  through  the  bonds  of  unity  of  the 
congregation of millions in the mosque of the Islamic world at the time of the prayers, 
and  by  means  of  ‘spiritual  radios,’  the  “Amen”  at  the  end  of  Sura  al-Fatiha  acquires 
universality and may become millions of “Amens.”11 

All praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds. 

Glory be unto to You! We have no knowledge save that which you taught us; 
indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.12 

                                             

11 Thus, if, according to his degree, an ordinary man receives a tiny share like a date-stone of this 

sacred truth, a perfected man who has advanced spiritually may receive a share like the palm-tree. 
But a person who has not advanced should not intentionally recall these meanings while reciting the 
Fatiha,* lest he impairs his sense of the Divine presence. When he advances to such a station, those 
meanings will anyway make themselves clear to him. 

* We asked our Master what was meant by “intentionally” in the footnote above, and we are 

writing here exactly the answer we received: 

I consider that to dwell on the comprehensive, elevated meanings of the Fatiha and tashahhud, 
not intentionally but indirectly, and not in detail, which induces a sort of heedlessness of the Divine 
presence, but concisely and briefly, dispels heedlessness and imparts a brilliance to the worship and 
invocations. This shows up completely the high value of the prayers, the Fatiha, and the tashahhud. 
What is meant by “not dwelling intentionally” at the end of the second part, is that sometimes to 
ponder over the meanings themselves in detail causes one to forget the prayers, lessening the sense of 
the Divine presence. But I feel that to dwell on them indirectly and concisely yields great benefits. 

Signed in the name of the Risale-i Nur students of the third School of Joseph,  
Ceylan 
12 Qur’an, 2:32. 

 

591

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate 
And from Him do we seek help 

[Part Three of a single lesson of the third School of Joseph] 

Introduction 

Part Two was written at  the implied command of Sura al-Fatiha in the five daily 
prayers, and through the effulgence of ‘I testify that there is no god but God.’ Now I 
have been obliged —for three reasons I am not at present permitted to disclose— to 
write  this  Third  Part,  prompted  by  the  tongue  of  ‘I  testify  that  Muhammad  is  the 
Messenger  of  God,’  and  through  the  effulgence  of  the  sublime  verses  at  the  end  of 
Sura al-Fath:  

It  is  He  Who  sent  His  Prophet  with  guidance  and  the  Religion  of Truth, to 
proclaim it over all religion, and enough is God for a Witness. * Muhammad 
is  the  Messenger  of  God;  and  those  who  are  with  him  are  strong  against 
unbelievers, [but] compassionate among each other,13  

which  contain  five  miraculous  predictions.  Referring  the  details,  explanations,  and 
documented  proofs  to  The  Miracles  of  Muhammad  in  Zülfikâr,  which  is  about  the 
Messengership  of  Muhammad  (PBUH),  and  to  the  Arabic  al-Hizb  al-Nuri  in  The 
Supreme Sign, here shall be written very briefly and concisely in the second and third 
of three ‘Indications’, a summary of the Hizb al-Nuri and a sort of  translation of the 
part  of  the  testimony  of  faith  “Muhammad  is  the  Messenger  of  God”  which  I 
constantly use in my Arabic reflective thought together with the affirmation of Divine 
unity, repeating them in the tesbihat following the prayers. 

FIRST INDICATION 

Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him),  who  responded  with  universal 
worship and teaching to the manifestation of the dominicality of the universe’s Owner, 
and His eternal Godhead, and His infinite bounties, is as necessary for the universe as 
is the sun. For he is the supreme master of mankind and its greatest prophet, the Glory 
of  the  World,  and  the  one  addressed  by  “If  not  for  you,  if  not  for  you,  I  would  not 
have created the spheres.”14 The Muhammadan Reality was the reason for the world’s  

                                             

13 Qur’an, 48:28-9. 
14 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 164; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 26. 

 

592

creation,  and  is  its  result  and  most  perfect  fruit.  So  too,  truths  connected  with  the 
universe  such  as  its  true  perfections  and  its  being  the  enduring  mirrors  of  an  eternal 
Beauteous  One  of  Glory,  and  the  manifestation  of  His  Names,  and  the  works  —
charged  with  duties—  of  His  wise  acts,  and  His  most  meaningful  missives,  and  its 
bearing an everlasting world, and its producing the result of the hereafter and an abode 
of  bliss  for  which  all  conscious  creatures  yearn,  —  these  are  all realized through  the 
Muhammadan  (PBUH)  Reality  and  his  messengership.  Since  this  is  so,  the  universe 
testifies  most  powerfully  and  decisively  to  his  messengership.  Moreover,  the 
messengership  of  Muhammad  (PBUH)  and  the  Muhammadan  Reality  give  certain 
good news of eternal life, which, in order to be saved from non-existence, nothingness, 
eternal  extinction,  and  absolute  annihilation,  foremost  the  World  of  Islam,  and  all 
mankind and all conscious creatures, constantly and earnestly seek, with all the powers 
of their comprehensive natures, with the tongues of all their abilities, and with all their 
supplications,  worship,  and  entreaties.  They 
to  Muhammad’s 
messengership  and  the  Muhammadan  Reality,  endorsing  that  he  is  the  pride  of 
mankind and the most noble of creatures. Moreover, in accordance with the rule “the 
cause  is  like  the  doer,” the equivalent of all the good works performed every  day by 
three  hundred  and  fifty  million  believers  being  recorded  in  Muhammad’s  (Peace  and 
blessings  be  upon  him)  book  of  good  works,  and  the  single  person  of  Muhammad 
(PBUH)  attaining  to  a  ‘station’  manifesting  the  universal  worship  and  effulgence  of 
hundreds  of  millions  of  righteous  worshippers,  and  perhaps  thousands  of  millions, 
testifies in truly powerful fashion to his messengership, affirming it. 

testify 

thus 

SECOND INDICATION 

The following indicates more than twenty testimonies, which I always ponder over 

reflectively in the course of my invocations: 

Muhammad  is  the  Messenger  of  God,  ever  faithful  to  his  promise,  through 
the  testimony  of  his  sudden  appearance  with  a  perfect  religion,  Islam,  and 
Shari‘a despite being unlettered, with the firmest belief, faith, and worship, 
the  most  elevated  cause,  supplications,  and  prayers,  the  most  general 
message, utter steadfastness, and wondrous fruitfulness, all without equal. 
A translation of the above15 and a brief exposition of its meaning are the following 

testimonies to the messengership of Muhammad (PBUH). 

                                             

‘Testimonies’ are in Arabic. [Tr.] 

15 In the original, the above and the passages in italics at the head of the subsequent fifteen 

 

593

The First is a proof of prophethood proceeding from eleven of his attributes and 
states.  Yes,  his  appearing  —despite  being  unlettered—  suddenly  and  without 
experience  with  a  religion  which  has  left  in  amazement  the  learned  men  and 
philosophers of fourteen centuries and has won first place among the revealed religions 
is an attribute without equal.  

Also unequalled is the fact that Islam, which emerged from his words, actions, and 
conduct,  has  at  all  times  educated  and  trained  the  spirits,  souls,  and  minds  of  three 
hundred and fifty million people, taking them to spiritual advancement.  

Moreover, he appeared with such a Shari‘a that for fourteen centuries it has ruled 

with its just laws one fifth of mankind, leading it to material and spiritual progress.  

So  too  that  Being  (PBUH)  appeared  with  such  a  faith  and  creed,  and  such 
strength  of  belief  that  all  the  people  of  reality  have  unanimously  affirmed  that,  since 
they  receive  perpetual  effulgence  from  it,  his  belief  was  at  the  highest  and  strongest 
degree. The opposition of his innumerable opponents at that time not causing him the 
slightest  anxiety,  doubt,  or  scruple,  shows  too  that  the  strength  of  his  belief  was 
without equal or like.  

He  also  displayed  such  worship  of  God  and  servitude  to  Him  that  bringing 
together the beginning and end of worship, imitating no one, he saw and conformed to 
the  subtlest  mysteries  of  worship,  and  fulfilled  them  even  in  times  of  greatest 
disturbance.  This  was  an  incomparable  attribute,  as  was  his  offering  such  prayers, 
supplications  and  entreaties  to  his  Creator  that  up  to  the  present  his  degree  has  not 
been reached, even with the meeting of many minds. For example, in the supplication 
Jawshan  al-Kabir,  taking  as  intercessor  a  thousand  and  one  Divine  Names,  he  so 
describes and acquaints his Creator that it has no like. Thus, no one has attained to his 
knowledge of God.  

He  called  people  to  religion  with  such  steadfastness  and  announced  his 
prophethood with such boldness that although his people, his uncle, the great powers 
of the world, and the followers of the former religions were all opposed and hostile to 
him, he did not fear or hold back even a jot, but challenged them all and successfully 
accomplished his task. This too was an unparalleled attribute. 

Thus, these eight wondrous, matchless attributes form a truly powerful testimony 
to  his  veracity  and  prophethood.  They  show  too  that  there  is  complete  certainty 
concerning his utter seriousness, trustworthiness, veracity, and truthfulness. Every day 
in the tashahhud with millions of tongues the World of Islam declares: “Peace be upon 
you, O Prophet! And may God’s mercy and blessings be upon you.” It submits to the  

 

594

function  with  which  he  was  charged,  and  affirming  the  good  news  of  the  eternal 
happiness which he brought, it gratefully says: “Peace be upon you, O Prophet!” in the 
face of the sure way leading to eternal life which mankind seeks and yearns for with an 
innate, profound longing, thus meeting with him in spirit and congratulating him in the 
name of three hundred million, indeed, thousands of millions. 

The Second Testimony, which comprises twenty universal testimonies, as well as 
many others: Through the testimony to his veracity of all truths of the pillars of belief.  
That  is,  the  truths,  realities,  and  veracity  of  the  six  pillars  of  belief  testify 
decisively  to  Muhammad’s  (PBUH)  messengership  and  veracity.  For  the  collective 
personality  of his life as Messenger and the basis of all he claimed and the essence of 
his  prophethood  were  those  six  pillars.  In  which  case,  all  the  evidences  verifying  the 
pillars  of  belief  proved  the  truth  of  Muhammad’s  (PBUH)  messengership,  and  his 
veracity. The evidences for the hereafter of the other pillars of faith are set forth in The 
Fruits  of  Belief  (Meyve  Risalesi)  and  the  Addenda  of  the  Tenth  Word;  and  all  the 
pillars together with their proofs form a proof of his messengership. 

The  Third  Universal  Testimony,  which  comprises  thousands  of  testimonies: 
Through  the  testimony  of  his  self  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him),  through  his 
thousands of miracles, perfections, and fine morality.  

That  is:  he  was  a  proof  of  himself  as  brilliant  as  the  sun,  through  the  powerful 
testimony to his  messengership and veracity of his thousands of miracles, attainments 
and perfections, and his elevated character and fine morality. Yes, as is proved in the 
wondrous  treatise  of  The  Miracles  of  Muhammad  (PBUH)  through  more  than  three 
hundred sound narrations, in accordance with the explicit verses  

And the moon split,16  

and  

And  when  you  threw,  it  was  not  you  who  threw;  it  was  rather  God  that 
threw,17  

the moon splitting in two at the sign of a single finger of his hand; and water flowing 
forth in five springs from the five fingers of the same hand, and an entire thirsty army 
drinking from these and testifying to it; and his casting a handful of dust with the same 
hand  at  an  attacking  enemy  army,  and  their  turning  tail  and  fleeing  when  the  dust 
entered the eyes of all of  

                                             

16 Qur’an, 54:1. 
17 Qur’an, 8:17. 

 

595

them;  and small pebbles uttering glorifications in the same hand, as though they were 
human,  saying: “Glory be  to God!” —hundreds of incidents such as these, which are 
related  in  ‘sound’  narrations;  and  some  about  which  there  are  unanimous  reports 
described  in  the  histories,  and  miracles,  which  according  to  exacting  scholars 
numbered  around  a thousand,  appearing at  his hand; and according to friend and foe 
alike his fine attributes and good character being of the very highest degree;18 and the 
unanimous  agreement  —at  the  degree  of  ‘absolute  certainty’—  of  all  the  people  of 
reality,  who  have  attained  to  spiritual  perfection  through  following  him  and  reached 
‘the  vision  of  certainty’  in  the  realities,  that  Muhammad’s  (PBUH)  perfections  and 
attainments were of the very highest level; and the spiritual achievements of the World 
of Islam, which proceeds from his religion; as well as the truths of mighty Islam — all 
these furnish evidence for his wondrous perfections. This surely means that this Being 
(PBUH) testified in most brilliant and universal fashion to his own messengership. 

The  Fourth  Testimony,  which  comprises  numerous  powerful  testimonies: 
Through  the  testimony  of  the  Qur’an,  with  all  its  truths  and  proofs.  That  is,  the 
Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  testifies  to  his  messengership  and  veracity  with  its 
innumerable truths and proofs. 

Yes,  with  all  its  veracious  truths,  the  Qur’an  of  Mighty  Stature,  which  as  is 
proved  Zülfikâr  is  miraculous  in  forty  respects,  has  illumined  fourteen  centuries  and 
governed through its unchanging laws one fifth of mankind; and from that time to this 
has challenged all those who have opposed it; and not even one of the suras of which 
anyone has dared to produce the like of; and as is proved in The Supreme Sign, whose 
six  aspects  are  luminous  and  cannot  be  penetrated  by  doubts;  and  whose  veracity  is 
endorsed  by  six  supreme  ‘stations’;  which  is  based  on  six  unshakeable  truths;  and  is 
eagerly  and  respectfully  recited  every  moment  by  hundreds  and  millions  of  tongues, 
and is inscribed with its sacredness on the hearts of hafizes; and from whose testimony 
proceeds  all  the  testimony  and  belief  of  the  World  of  Islam;  and  from  whose  source 
flow forth all the sciences of belief and of Islam; and just as it affirms all the previous 
revealed scriptures, so is it affirmed by them; — with all its truths and all its proofs of 
its  veracity,  the  Qur’an  of  Mighty  Stature  testifies  to  the  truthfulness  and 
messengership of Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him). 

                                             

18 The hero ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him), whose courage was of the very highest order, 
said: “When we were frightened when fighting in battle, we used to hide behind God’s Messenger 
(PBUH).” The histories relate how even his enemies of that time corroborated that all his virtues were 
superior, the same as his courage. 

 

596

The Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Universal Testimonies: 

Through  the  testimony  of  Jawshan  al-Kabir,  and  the  sacredness  of  its 
allusions;  and  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  the  power  of  its  proofs;  and  the  past, 
and the unanimity of its signs of a forthcoming prophet; and the future, and 
the confirmation of thousands of its events. 

That is  to  say,  Jawshan  al-Kabir,  which looks both explicitly and allusively to a 
thousand  and  one  Divine  Names;  is  a  wondrous  supplication  that  in  one  respect 
proceeds from the Qur’an; is superior to all the other invocations recited by those who 
advance  in  knowledge  of  God;  which  was  brought  as  revelation  by  Gabriel  during  a 
military  expedition,  who  said:  “Cast  away  your  armour  and  in  its  place  read  this 
Jawshan!”  —  the  truths  it  contains  and  its  perfectly  accurate  descriptions  of  the 
Sustainer  testify  to  Muhammad’s  (PBUH)  messengership  and  veracity.  So  too, 
through  proving  rationally  and  logically  as  a  single  proof  with  its  one  hundred  and 
thirty  parts  all  the  truths  of  the  messengership  of  Muhammad  (PBUH), and  teaching 
matters which in the view of philosophy are remote from reason in the most reasonable 
and easy fashion as though they were before one’s very eyes, the Risale-i Nur —which 
in one respect received effulgence from the Jawshan and was born of it— testifies in 
universal fashion to Muhammad’s (PBUH) messengership and veracity.  

Also,  the  past  was  a  universal  witness  to  his  messengership,  for  numerous 
incidents which occurred before the commencement of his prophethood called irhasat, 
and  wonders  which  were  counted  as  miracles  of  the  coming  prophet  and  are  related 
unanimously in the histories and books of biography, testify in authentic fashion to his 
messengership. These are of many different sorts. A part of them are described in the 
coming ‘Testimonies’ below, and others are related in the form of sound narrations in 
Zülfikâr and in books of history.   

For example, close to the time of the Prophet’s (PBUH) birth stones being rained 
down  from the claws  of the ababil birds on the heads of Abraha’s soldiers, who had 
come  to  destroy  the  Ka‘ba;  and  on  the  night  of  his  birth  the  idols  in  the  Ka‘ba  all 
toppling  over;  and  the palace of Chrosroes the Persian being destroyed; and the fire-
worshipping  Zoroastrians’  fire being extinguished that night, which had been burning 
continuously for a thousand years; and on the certain reports of Bahira the Monk and 
Halima  al-Sa‘diya,  clouds  throwing  shadows  around  his  head;  numerous  events  like 
these gave forewarning of his prophethood before its commencement.  

Also,  there  were  very  many  events  of  differing  kinds  that  he  predicted  would 

occur in the future, that is, after his death. Some were prophecies  

 

597

about his Family and Companions, and the conquests of Islam, which are given in The 
Miracles  of  Muhammad  in  Zülfikâr,  together  with  their  authentic  sources.  Others 
were  eighty  accurate  predictions, including ‘Uthman (May God be pleased with him) 
being  martyred  while  reading  the  Qur’an,  Husayn  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him) 
being  martyred  at  Karbala,  the  conquests  of  Syria  and  Iran  and  Istanbul,  and 
emergence of the ‘Abbasid dynasty, and Jenghiz and Hulagu defeating and destroying 
it, have all been described in detail on the basis of sound narrations and the books of 
history  and  the  Prophet’s  biography.  This  means  that numerous predictions of future 
events,  and  the  future,  which  proved  Muhammad’s  (PBUH)  veracity,  testify  also  in 
powerful and universal fashion to Muhammad’s messengership and its veracity. 

The Ninth, Tenth, Eleventh, and Twelfth Testimonies: 

Through  the  testimony  of  Muhammad’s  Family  to  his  veracity  through  the 
power of their certain belief at the degree of ‘absolute certainty;’ and of his 
Companions,  through  their  perfect  belief  at  the  degree  of  ‘the  vision  of 
certainty;’  and  of  the  purified  scholars  through  the  power  of  their 
investigations at the degree of ‘knowledge of certainty;’ and of the spiritual 
poles, through the conformity  of their illuminations and unfoldings with his 
messengership and its certainty. 

That  is,  of  the  universal  testimonies  to  Muhammad’s  (PBUH)  truthfulness  and 

veracity, 

The  Ninth:  With  their  unanimous  and  absolutely  certain  belief,  and  their 
unfoldings and illuminations, and the extraordinary guidance they gave the Umma and 
their  wonder-working,  the  great  saints  of  Prophet’s  (PBUH)  Family,  who  in 
benedictions for the Prophet are held equal to the descendants of Abraham (Peace be 
upon  him),  who  manifested  the  meaning  of  “The  scholars  of  my  community  are  the 
equivalent  of  the  prophets  of  the  Children  of  Israel,”19  and  ‘Ali, Hasan, Husayn, and 
the  twelve  Imams  of  the  Prophet’s  Family,  and  the  spiritual  poles  and  leaders  like 
Gawth al-A‘zam, Ahmad al-Rufa’i, Ahmad al-Badawi, Ibrahim al-Dassuqi, and Abu’l-
Hasan  al-Shazali  all  ratified  through  their  belief  and  testimonies  the  messengership, 
veracity, and truthfulness of Muhammad (PBUH). 

The Tenth: The Companions of the Prophet, regarded as the most elevated and 
esteemed group after the prophets, through the light of Muhammad (PBUH) came in a 
short time to govern with justice from east to west despite being illiterate nomads, and 
becoming advanced, educated,  

                                             

19 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 64; Tecrid-i Sahih (Turk. trans.), i, 107. 

 

598

civilized masters, teachers, diplomats and just judges, they defeated world powers and 
made  that  century  into  an  age  of  happiness.  After  scrutinizing  every  aspect  of  his 
conduct, through the power of the many miracles they witnessed with their own eyes, 
they  abandoned  their  former  enmities  and  the  ways  of  their  forefathers,  and many of 
them  such  as  Khalid  ibn  al-Walid  and  Ikrima  Ibn  Abu  Jahl  gave  up  the  tribalism  of 
their  fathers.  Their  embracing  Islam  in  truly  devoted  and self-sacrificing manner, and 
believing  in  Muhammad’s  veracity  and  messengership  at  the  degree  of  ‘vision  of 
certainty’ forms an unshakeable universal testimony. 

The  Eleventh:  The  belief  in  Muhammad’s  messengership  and  veracity  in 
reasoned,  logical  manner  at  the  degree  of  ‘knowledge  of certainty’ of the mujtahids, 
imams, and authoritative scholars, who are known as the purified ones and veracious 
ones,  and  of the thousands of investigative scholars such as the brilliant philosophers 
Ibn  Sina  and  Ibn  Rushd,  based  on  thousands  of  categorical  arguments  and  definitive 
proofs, each following his own way, forms a testimony so universal that only one with 
the intelligence of all of them could oppose them. 

One of those innumerable witnesses at the present time is the Risale-i Nur, before 
which  the  deniers  have  found  themselves  helpless,  so  deceiving  the  police  and 
judiciary, have tried to silence it by means of the courts. 

The  Twelfth:  In  their  spiritual  progress,  the  profoundest  people  of  reality  and 
researchers  into  the  realities  known  as  spiritual  poles,  each  of  whom  drew  into  the 
circle  of  his  instruction  a  significant  part  of  the  Umma  in  the  World  of  Islam,  and 
through his wondrous guidance and wonder-working caused those people to advance 
spiritually, and whose progress was based on illumination and disclosing the realities in 
place  of  proofs  —they  saw  ‘experientially’  through  their  illuminations  Muhammad’s 
(PBUH) messengership and truthfulness and that his veracity was  of the very highest 
degree. Their unanimous and mutually conforming testimony to his prophethood forms 
such a signature that no one who does not attain to a degree of perfections as elevated 
as all of them can erase it. 

The Thirteenth Testimony, which consists of four universal, most extensive and 

definite proofs: 

Through  the  testimony  of  the  past  and  the  agreement  in  the  tidings  of  the 
soothsayers, the voices from the Unseen, and the gnostics in all the periods 
of  the  past,  and  the  testimony  of  the  tidings  of  the  prophets  and  Divine 
messengers, Peace be upon them, and the good news of the messengership of 
Muhammad,  Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him,  in  the  previous  holy 
scriptures. 

 

599

A brief explanation of the above passage will be given here, for there are precise 
details  together  with  the  chains  of  authorities  in  the  end  section  of  The  Miracles  of 
Muhammad, in Zülfikâr. 

It  is  recorded  with  sound  narrations,  and  in  part  with  unanimous  reports,  in  the 
histories  and  books  of  Hadith  and  the  Prophet’s  biography  that  among  the  most 
prominent  and  famous  of  mankind  in  past  times,  foremost  the  prophets  and  the 
gnostics,  soothsayers,  and  ‘voices  from  the  Unseen’  foretold  Muhammad’s  (PBUH) 
messengership  and  coming  unanimously,  explicitly  and  repeatedly  in  the  form  of 
irhasat.  Since  the  most  powerful  and  certain  of  those  thousands  of  predictions  are 
described in detail in The Miracles of Muhammad, we refer you to that and here only 
say  by  way  of  a  brief  indication:  out  of  hundreds  in  the  revealed  scriptures  of  the 
Torah,  Gospels,  and  Psalms,  brought  by  the  prophets,  twenty  verses  about  the 
prophethood  of  Muhammad  (PBUH)  which  are  close  to  being  explicit  are  written  in 
the  Nineteenth  Letter  (The  Miracles  of  Muhammad).  While  Husayn  al-Jisri  found  a 
hundred verses about Muhammad’s prophethood, despite the numerous corruptions in 
their texts made by Jews and Christians, and wrote them in his book.20 

According  to  a  sound  narration  concerning  which  were  unanimous  reports,  the 
soothsayers,  and  foremost  Shiqq  and  Satih,  who  by  means  of  jinns  and  spirit  beings 
gave information about the Unseen and are now called mediums, foretold explicitly the 
coming of God’s Messenger (PBUH) and that he would wipe out the Persian Empire. 
They stated repeatedly in a way that could not be doubted that a prophet was shortly 
to appear in the Hijaz.  

Similarly,  Ka‘b  ibn  Lu’ayy,  one  of  the  Prophet’s  forefathers  and  a  gnostic,  and 
many  other  gnostics  and  the  saints  of  that  time  such  as  the  rulers  of  Yemen  and 
Abyssinia,  Sayf  ibn  Dhi  Yazan  and  Tubba,  foretold  clearly  Muhammad’s  (PBUH) 
messengership,  and  proclaimed  it  in  their  poetry.  The  most  important  and  certain  of 
these  are  included  in  the  Nineteenth  Letter.  One  of  those  kings  even  said:  “I  would 
choose  to  be  Muhammad’s  (PBUH)  servant  in  preference  to  ruling  this  kingdom.” 
Another  said:  “If  I  had  lived  to  see  him,  I  would  have  been  his  cousin.”  That  is,  I 
would have been a devoted servant and minister of his like ‘Ali (May God be pleased 
with  him).  The  histories and books of biography have published all these prophecies, 
showing that the gnostics affirmed Muhammad’s (PBUH) messengership and veracity 
with a powerful, universal testimony. 

                                             

4 vols. 

20 Husayn al-Jisri, al-Risalat al-Hamidiyya [Turk. trans. Manastırlı Ismail Hakkı], Istanbul 1308, 

 

600

Similarly,  spirit  beings  called  ‘hatif,’  which  are  heard  but  not  seen,  made 
predictions  about  Muhammad’s  messengership,  the  same  as  the  gnostics  and 
soothsayers,  foretelling  his  prophethood  in  most  explicit  fashion.  Also,  by foretelling 
his  prophethood,  many  other things  affirmed  his  messengership and veracity, such as 
animals  sacrificed  to  idols,  idols,  and  gravestones,  testifying  through  the  tongue  of 
history. 

The Fourteenth Testimony: The following Arabic piece alludes to the universe’s 

powerful testimony: 

Through  the  testimony  of  the  universe  to  the  comprehensive  messengership 
of Muhammad (PBUH) through its aims and the Divine purposes in it, which 
would  otherwise  come  to  nothing,  for  through  the  sending  of  man  and 
particularly  of  Muhammad  its  value  and  duties  were  established,  and  its 
beauties  and  perfections  became  clear,  and  the  wisdom  in  its  truths  were 
realized.  For  his  messengership  revealed  them  and  was  the  means  of  their 
realization.  If  it  had  not  been  for  his  messengership,  this  perfect  universe, 
this  eternal  and  meaningful  mighty  book,  would  have  gone  for  nothing,  its 
meanings would have vanished and its perfections declined utterly, which is 
impossible in numerous respects. 

In The Supreme Sign, the above is interpreted as follows: 
Just  as  the  universe  points  to  its  Maker,  Writer,  and  Inscriber,  Who  creates, 
administers,  and  organizes  it,  and  Who  decorating,  determining,  and  planning  it,  has 
disposal over it as though it was a palace, a book, an exhibition, or place of display; so 
it requires and demands an elevated herald, a truthful discoverer, an exacting master, a 
faithful  teacher,  who  will  know  the  Divine  purposes  in  its  creation,  and  make  them 
known, and will teach the instances of dominical wisdom in its changes, and announce 
the  results  of  its  dutiful  motions,  and  proclaim  its  value  and  the  perfections  of  the 
beings  within  it.  Since  this  is  so  and  it  points  to  his  existence,  surely  testifying  in 
powerful and universal fashion to the veracity of Muhammad (Peace and blessings be 
upon  him),  who  performed  these  duties  better  than  anyone,  and  to  his  being  the 
highest and most loyal official of its Creator, it declares: “I testify that Muhammad is 
the Messenger of God.” 

Yes, through the Light Muhammad (PBUH) brought the universe’s nature, value, 
and  perfections,  and the duties, results, and value of the beings within it and the fact 
that  they  are  officials,  all  became  known  and  were  realized.  From  top  to  bottom  it 
became  Divine  missives  full  of  meaning,  an  embodied  dominical  Qur’an,  and  a 
magnificent exhibition of Divine works. If not for his Light, it becomes a mere desolate 
ruin,  

 

601

confused,  a  terrible  place  of  mourning,  toppling  over  into  the  darknesses  of  non-
existence,  nothingness,  death,  and  obliteration.  It  is  in consequence  of  this  truth  that 
the universe’s perfections, purposeful transformations, and eternal meanings declare in 
powerful fashion: “We testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of God!” 

The  Fifteenth  Testimony:  The  following  is  an  Arabic  piece  which  comprises 
numerous  sacred  testimonies.  It  indicates  the  sacred  testimony  to  Muhammad’s 
(PBUH)  messengership  given  through  the  acts  of  the  dominicality  and  deeds  of 
mercifulness of the Necessarily Existent One Who has disposal over the universe, and 
through  Whose  will,  command,  and  power  occur  all  change  and  transformation, 
motion and rest, from minute particles to the planets, and all the disposals of life and 
death.  

Through the testimony of the universe’s Owner, its Creator and Disposer, to 
the messengership of Muhammad, through the deeds of His mercifulness and 
acts of His dominicality; such as the mercy of revealing to him the Qur’an of 
Miraculous  Exposition;  and  displaying  many  varieties  of  miracles  at  his 
hand;  and  assisting  him  and  protecting  him  in  all  circumstances;  and 
through perpetuating his religion together with all its truths; and by raising 
him  to  a  position  of  high  respect  and  honour  and  bestowal  over  all 
creatures,  as  is  to  be  seen  and  observed;  and  His  act  of  dominicality  of 
making  Muhammad’s  messengership  a  spiritual  sun  in  the  universe,  and 
making his religion the index of the perfections of His servants; and making 
his  reality  a  comprehensive  mirror  to  the  manifestations  of  His  Godhead; 
and His entrusting him with duties necessary for the existence of creatures in 
the  universe  such  as  mercy,  wisdom,  and  justice,  as  necessary  as  food  and 
water, and air and light. 

Referring  details  of  this  most  extensive,  certain,  and  sacred  testimony  to  the 

Risale-i Nur, here we shall merely take a look at a brief and concise meaning of it. 

Since —in accordance with the justice and wisdom, mercy, favour, and protection 
which  we  see  in  the  regular,  orderly  disposals  in  the  universe—  it  is  the  practice  of 
dominicality  to  always  protect  the  good  and  deal  blows  at  the  bad  and  liars,  as 
demanded  by  ‘the  acts  of  His  mercifulness,’  this world’s Disposer and Administrator 
revealed  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  to  Muhammad  (PBUH);  and  He 
bestowed on him nearly a thousand miracles of very many sorts; and compassionately 
preserved  him  in  all  circumstances  and  dangerous  situations,  even  by  means  of  a 
pigeon and a spider; and gave him complete success in all his duties; and perpetuated 
his religion together with all its truths; and caused his  

 

602

religion of Islam to spread over all the earth and to all mankind; and by raising him to a 
position of honour above all creatures and a permanent rank of acceptance superior to 
all the pre-eminent of mankind and, as is agreed by friend and foe alike, bestowed on 
him the highest character and qualities, and made one fifth of mankind his community 
— all of which testify most decisively to his faithfulness and messengership; so we see 
from  the  point  of  view  of  ‘the  acts  of  dominicality’  that  this  world’s  Disposer  and 
Administrator  made  Muhammad’s  (PBUH)  messengership  a  sun  in  the  universe,  and 
as is proved in the Risale-i Nur, caused it to dispel all kinds of darknesses and show its 
luminous  truths,  and  make  happy  all  conscious  beings,  indeed  the  universe,  with the 
good news of eternal life; and He made his religion an index of perfections for all the 
acceptable people of worship and a sound programme for their acts of worship; and as 
is indicated by the Qur’an and Jawshan, He made Muhammad’s Reality, which is his 
collective  personality,  a  comprehensive  mirror  to the manifestations of His Godhead; 
and  as  is  indicated  by  the above-mentioned truths, and by the fact that every day for 
fourteen  centuries  he  has  gained  the  equivalent  of  all  the  good  works  of  all  his 
community, and by his works and traces in man’s social and spiritual life, He made him 
the highest leader, master, and authority of mankind; and sent him to the assistance of 
mankind  with  sacred,  sublime  duties,  and  made  men  as  needy  for  his  religion,  his 
Shari‘a,  and  the  truths  of  Islam21  as  they  are  for  mercy,  wisdom,  justice,  food,  air, 
to  Muhammad’s  (PBUH) 
water,  and 
messengership  with  twelve  universal,  decisive  proofs  —  since  this  is  so,  is  it  at  all 
possible  that  the  messengership  of  Muhammad  (PBUH),  which  thus  manifests  these 
universal, extensive testimonies of the universe’s Owner, Who is not indifferent to the 
ordering of the wing of a fly even or a flower, should not be a Sun of the universe? 

thus  offering  sacred 

testimony 

light; 

Each of these fifteen Testimonies comprise numerous testimonies, and through the 
tongue of miracles the Second even comprises thousands, thus proving the profession 
“I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of  

                                             

21 In my old age and wretchedness, I perceived a millionth of the spiritual sustenance brought by 
Muhammad (PBUH). If I had been able, I would have thanked him by uttering benedictions for him 
with millions of tongues. It was like this: 

I suffer greatly from separation and parting, but the world I love and the things in it leave me and 

depart. I know that I too shall depart. And it is only by hearing from Muhammad (PBUH) the good 
news of everlasting happiness and eternal life that I am saved from that severe pain and soul-searing 
despair and I find complete solace. In fact, when I say: “Peace be upon you, O Prophet, and God’s 
mercy and blessings!” in the tashahhud during the prayers, I am both paying allegiance to him, and 
declaring my submission and obedience to his rank, and offering him congratulations on his duty, and 
expressing a sort of thanks and response to the good news he brought of eternal happiness. All 
Muslims offer these greetings five times every day. 

 

603

God”  most  powerfully  and  definitely  and  proclaiming  its  reality,  value,  and 
importance,  so  that  every  day  five  times  in  the  tashahhud  the  World  of  Islam 
announces it to the universe with millions of tongues. So too, thousands of millions of 
believers  unhesitatingly  accept  and  affirm  that  the  Muhammadan  (PBUH)  Reality, 
which is the basis of that profession, is the original seed of the universe, a reason for 
its  creation,  and  its  most  perfect  fruit. And the universe’s Owner (May His Glory be 
exalted) made that collective personality of Muhammad (PBUH) the loudest herald of 
the  sovereignty  of  His  dominicality;  the  accurate  discloser  of  the  talisman  of  the 
universe  and  riddle  of  creation;  a  shining  exemplar  of  His  favour  and  mercy;  an 
eloquent  tongue  of  His  compassion  and  love;  the most  powerful bringer  of the good 
tidings  of  everlasting  life  and  happiness  in  the  eternal  realm;  and  of  His  messengers, 
His final and greatest Prophet. 

It  may  be  seen  from this what a great error, foolishness, and crime those people 
commit who do not accept a truth such as this, or attach no importance to it, and what 
a terrible loss they suffer. 

Thus,  as  indicated  in Part Two, Sura al-Fatiha in the ritual prayers demonstrates 
with  decisive  proofs  the  affirmation  of  Divine  unity  in  the  profession  “I  testify  that 
there  is  no  god  but  God,”  which  is  said  in  the  tashahhud,  setting  innumerable 
signatures to it; so too this Third Part sets forth powerful testimonies to the reality of 
messengership claimed in “I testify that Muhammad is God’s Messenger,” again stated 
in the tashahhud, stamping it with innumerable confirmatory signatures. 

O  Most  Merciful  of  the  Merciful!  In  veneration  of  Your  Most  Noble 
Messenger (PBUH) allow us his intercession, give us success in following his 
Sunna, and make us neighbours to his Family and Companions in the Realm 
of Bliss! Amen. Amen. Amen. 

O God! Grant him blessings and peace, and to his Family and Companions, 
to  the  number  of  the  letters  of  the  Qur’an,  both  those  recited  and  those 
written. Amen. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.22 

                                             

22 Qur’an, 2:32. 

 

604

The Shining Proof 
Second Station 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate 
And from Him do we seek help 

 [One  of  the  truths  contained  in  the  last  verse  of  Sura  al-Fatiha,  which 
indicates the comparison of the people of guidance and the straight path and 
the  people  of  misguidance  and  rebellion,  and  is  the  source  of  all  the 
comparisons  in  the  Risale-i  Nur,  is  expressed  also  in  wondrous  and 
miraculous fashion by the verse of Sura al-Nur: 

God is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The parable of His light is as 
if  there  were  a  niche  and  within  it  a  lamp;  the  lamp  enclosed  in glass;  the 
glass  as  it  were a brilliant star; lit from a blessed tree, an olive, neither of 
the east nor of the west, whose oil is well-nigh luminous, though fire scarce 
touched  it:  Light  upon  Light!  God  guides  whom  He  will  to  His  Light;  God 
sets forth parables for men; and God knows all things.23 

and a subsequent verse: 

Or  [the  unbelievers’  state]  is  like  the  depths  of  darkness  in  a  vast  deep 
ocean,  overwhelmed  with  billow  topped  by  billow,  topped  by  [dark] 
clouds...(to the end of the verse)]24 

It  is  proved  in  the First Ray that the first verse above, the Light Verse, contains 
ten  allusions  to  the  Risale-i  Nur;  it  miraculously  foretells  that  Qur’anic  commentary. 
This  was  the  main  reason  the  name  ‘Nur’  (light)  was  given  to  the  Risale-i  Nur.  In 
consequence of the description in the comparison of a journey of the imagination in a 
section  of  the  Twenty-Ninth  Letter,  of  a  miracle  resembling  that  of  the  “Nun  of 
Na‘budu” in the word “Nur” in this extraordinary verse, the traveller in The Supreme 
Sign  (Âyetü’l-Kübra) questioned the whole universe and every sort of being in order 
to seek, find, and learn about his Creator. He came to know Him through thirty-three 
ways and cogent proofs with ‘the certainty of knowledge’ and ‘the vision of certainty.’ 
The  untiring,  insatiable  traveller  journeyed  too  with  his  mind,  heart,  and  imagination 
through the centuries and  

                                             

23 Qur’an, 24:35. 
24 Qur’an, 24:40. 

 

605

the  levels  of  the  heavens  and  earth,  and  seeing  and  inspecting  the  whole  world  as  a 
city,  he  mounted  his  reason  sometimes  on  the  wisdom  of  the  Qur’an,  sometimes  on 
philosophy,  and  gazing  at  the  most  distant  levels  through  the  powerful  telescope  of 
imagination, he saw reality as it is, and in part informed us of it in The Supreme Sign. 

Now,  of  those  many  worlds  and  levels  he  entered  on  his  journey  of  the 
imagination,  which  had  the  meaning  of  a  comparison  and  was  completely  in 
conformity  with  reality,  we  shall  explain  by  way  of  example  only  three  levels, 
extremely concisely, in order to illustrate the comparison at the end of Sura al-Fatiha. 
However,  this  will  be  only  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  power  of  reason.  We  refer 
you to the Risale-i Nur for the other observations and comparisons. 

The First Example is like this:  

The traveller, who had come into the world solely to find his Creator and become 
acquainted  with  Him,  said  to  his  reason:  “We  have asked  everything  concerning  our 
Creator and have received perfectly satisfying answers. In order to learn about the Sun 
one has to ask the Sun itself, so now we shall make a further journey in order to find 
and  become  acquainted  with  our  Creator  through  the  manifestations  of  His  sacred 
attributes of knowledge, will, and power, and through His visible works, and through 
the  manifestations  of  His  Names.”  So  he  entered  the  world.  Then  the  people  of 
misguidance, a second current, embarked on the ship of the earth. The traveller put on 
the spectacles of the science and philosophy which does not follow the wisdom of the 
Qur’an, and looking in accordance with the programme of the geography that does not 
read the Qur’an, saw that the earth was travelling seventy times faster than a cannon-
ball,  covering  a twenty-thousand-year distance in one year in an orbit in the midst of 
the  infinite  void.  It  had  taken  upon  itself  myriad  species  of  wretched,  helpless  living 
beings.  He  realized  that  if  it  confused  its  way  even  for  a  minute,  or  if  a  stray  star 
collided  with  it,  it  would  disintegrate,  pouring  all  those  wretched  creatures  into 
nothingness and non-existence. Perceiving the awesome calamity of the currents of  

Not those who have received Your anger, nor those who have gone astray,25  

and the suffocating darkness of  

Or  [the  unbelievers’  state]  is  like  the  depths  of  darkness  in  a  vast  deep 
ocean,26  

                                             

25 Qur’an, 1:7. 
26 Qur’an, 24:40. 

 

606

he  exclaimed:  “Alas!  What  have  we  done?  Why  did  we  board  this  terrible  ship?  Is 
there  any  way  of  being  saved  from  it?”  Then  smashing  the  spectacles  of  blind 
philosophy, he joined the current of “Those whom You have blessed.”27 

Suddenly the wisdom of the Qur’an came to his assistance. Giving to his reason a 
telescope which shows reality, it  told him to look through it. He looked and saw the 
Name of Sustainer of the Heavens and Earth28 rising like a sun in the constellation of  

It is He who has made the earth subservient to you, so traverse you its tracts, 
and eat of its sustenance.29  

The Sustainer had made the earth an orderly, safe ship, and filled it with living beings 
together with their sustenance, causing it to journey around the sun in the seas of the 
universe  for  numerous  benefits and instances of wisdom, bringing the produce of the 
seasons  to  those  who  wished  for  sustenance.  Two  angels  called  Thawr  and  Hut  had 
been  appointed  captains  of  the  ship,  and  they  took  it  on  its  voyage  through  the 
magnificent  dominical  regions  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  Glorious  Creator’s  creatures 
and guests. The traveller understood that this showed the reality of “God is the Light 
of the heavens and the earth,” making known his Creator through this Name. With all 
his  heart  and  spirit  he  exclaimed:  “All  praise  be  to  God,  the  Sustainer  of  All  the 
Worlds,” and joined the group of “Those whom You have blessed.” 

The Second Sample of what the traveller saw on his journey through the worlds: 

The traveller alighted from the ship of the earth and entered the world of animals 
and men. He looked at that world through the spectacles of the natural science which 
does  not  receive  its  spirit  from  religion,  and  saw  that  although  those  innumerable 
animate  creatures  had  endless  needs  and  were  assaulted  by  numberless  vexatious 
enemies  and  pitiless  events,  their  capital  was  only  a  thousandth,  or  even  a  hundred 
thousandth of what they needed. Their power too was perhaps a millionth of what was 
necessary  to  combat  those  harmful  things.  Being  connected  to  them  through  his 
intelligence  and  out  of  compassion  for  his  fellow  beings,  he  so  pitied  them  in  their 
ghastly plight, and feeling a hellish pain was so sorry and despairing, that he regretted 
a  thousand  times  over  his  ever  having  come  to  that  wretched  world.  Then  suddenly 
Qur’anic  wisdom  came  to  his  assistance,  and  handing  him  the  telescope  of  “Those 
whom You have  

                                             

27 Qur’an, 1:7. 
28 Qur’an, 13:16. 
29 Qur’an, 67:15. 

 

607

blessed,”  it  told  him  to  look  through  it.  He  looked  and  saw  that  through  the 
manifestation  of  “God  is  the  Light  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,”  numerous  Divine 
Names  such  as  Most  Merciful,  All-Compassionate,  Provider,  Bestower,  Munificent, 
and Preserver, each rose like the sun in the constellations of such verses as: 

And there is no living thing but He has hold of its forelock.30 * The beasts do 
not  carry  their  own  sustenance;  God  sustains  them,  and  you.31  *  And  we 
have ennobled the sons of Adam.32 * And the pious shall be in bliss.33 

They filled the world of men and beasts with mercy and bounties, transforming it into a 
temporary Paradise. He understood that they make known perfectly the generous host 
of  this  fine,  instructive  guest-house,  which  is  well  worth  being  gazed  upon,  and  a 
thousand times he repeated: “All praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds!” 

The Third Example of the hundreds of his observations during his journey: 

The  traveller  from  the  world,  who  wanted  to  know  his  Creator  through  the 
manifestations  of  His  Names  and  attributes,  turned  to  his  mind  and  imagination  and 
said: “Come! Like the spirits and angels we shall leave our bodies behind and ascend 
to the skies. We shall question the inhabitants of the heavens concerning our Creator.” 
His  spirit  mounted  his  imagination,  and  his  mind  mounted  his  thought,  and  together 
they  rose  to  the  heavens.  They  took  astronomy  as  their  guide,  and  looked  with  the 
view of the philosophy which does not heed religion, and the currents of “Those who 
have received Your wrath” and “Those who have gone astray.” He saw thousands of 
heavenly bodies and fiery stars, a thousand times larger than the earth and travelling a 
hundred  times  faster  than  a  cannon-ball, speeding  one  within the other, unconscious, 
lifeless,  and  aimless.  If  by  chance  one  of  them  had  confused  its  way  for  a  second,  it 
would have collided with another unconscious globe in that boundless, empty, infinite 
world, causing utter confusion and chaos, like doomsday.  

Whichever  direction  he  looked,  the  traveller  was  filled  with  terror  and 
bewilderment;  he  was  sorry  a  thousand  times  over  he had ascended to the skies. His 
mind  and  imagination  went  utterly  to  pieces.  They  declared:  “Our  duty  is to see and 
point out fine truths. We resign then from observing and understanding such infernally 
ugly and painful things. We do not  

                                             

30 Qur’an, 11:56. 
31 Qur’an, 29:60. 
32 Qur’an, 17:70. 
33 Qur’an, 82:13. 

 

608

want any such thing.” Then suddenly, through the manifestation of “God is the Light 
of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,”  numerous  Names  like  “Subjugator  of  the  sun  and 
moon,”  and  “Sustainer of all  the worlds,” each rose like suns in the constellations of 
verses such as:  

And We have adorned the lower heavens with lamps,34  

and  

and,  

Do they then not look at the heavens above them, how We have raised them 
and adorned them,35  

Then he withdrew to the sky and formed it into seven heavens.36  

They  filled  all  the  heavens  with  light  and  with  angels,  transforming  it  into  a  huge 
mosque  or  military  encampment.  The  traveller  entered  the  current  of  “Those  whom 
You have blessed.” He was saved from that of “Those who have gone astray” and “Or 
[the unbelievers’ state] is like the depths of darkness in a vast deep ocean.” He saw a 
magnificent land, as beautiful and well-ordered as Paradise. Observing that on all sides 
its inhabitants were making known the All-Glorious Creator, the value of his mind and 
imagination was increased a thousandfold, and their duties advanced likewise. 

Referring  to  the  Risale-i  Nur  the  other  observations  of  the  traveller  through  the 
universe,  which  are  comparable  with  these  three  examples  out  of  hundreds,  together 
with  knowledge  of  the  Necessarily  Existent  One  through  the  manifestations  of  His 
Names,  here  we  suffice  with  these  brief indications and cut a long story short. Now, 
like that traveller through the world, we shall try to know the Creator of the universe 
through  the  works  and  manifestations  of  only  three  of  His  sacred ‘seven  attributes:’ 
knowledge, will, and power. For details, we refer you to the Risale-i Nur. 

The  following  piece  in  Arabic  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  Arabic  Hizb  al-
Nuri,37  which  I  constantly  recite  reflectively.  It  expounds  three  of  the  thirty-three 
degrees of the phrase “God is Most Great” (Allahu Akbar). This is followed by a sort 
of  translation  of  the  Arabic  piece, consisting of brief indications, which opens up the 
way  to  acquiring  belief  in  Divine  knowledge,  will,  and  power  at  the  degree  of  ‘the 
vision of certainty’ through pointing out their manifestations in the universe, a subject 
which greatly preoccupied the scholars of theology and of the tenets of  

                                             

34 Qur’an, 67:5. 
35 Qur’an, 50:6. 
36 Qur’an, 2:29. 
37 See page 501, footnote 78. 

 

609

belief.  Through  pointing  out  the  manifestations  of  knowledge,  will,  and  power,  the 
following  indications  thus  open  up  the  way  to  complete  belief  —at  the  degree  of 
knowledge of certainty— in the Necessarily Existent One’s existence and unity, and to 
the affirmation of that belief. 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Say:  “Praise  be  to  God,  Who  begets  no  son,  and  has  no  partner  in  [His] 
dominion;  nor  [needs]  He  any  to  protect  Him  from  humiliation;  Yes, 
magnify Him for His greatness and glory!”38 

God  is  greater  than  everything  in  respect  of  power  and  knowledge,  for  He  is 
knowing  of  all  things  with  all-encompassing  knowledge  necessary  to  His 
Essence.39 Nothing can be hidden from His knowledge because of the mystery of 
luminosity;  existence 
its  presence  and  witnessing  and  all-encompassing 
necessitates universality, and the light of knowledge encompasses all the world of 
existence.  Yes,  the  balanced  order,  and  regular  balances,  and  general, 
purposeful wisdom, and all-embracing,  particular favours, and the well-ordered 
decrees,  and  fruitful  determining,  and  specified  appointed  hours  of  death,  and 
the  regular  sustenance,  and  the  wise  skills,  and  the  adorned solicitude, and  the 
utterly  perfect  order,  harmony,  arrangement,  proficiency,  and  balance,  and 
absolute  distinction  with  absolute  ease  all  point  to  the  all-encompassing 
knowledge of the One All-Knowing of the Unseen.  

Should He not know, He that created? And He is the One Who understands 
the finest mysteries [and] is well-acquainted [with them].40 

The  comparison  between  man’s  fine art, which points to his consciousness, and 
the  fine  creation of man, which points to man’s Creator, is the comparison between 
the  tiny  glimmer  of  a  fire-fly  on  a  dark  night  and  the  splendour  of  the  sun  at  full 
noon. 

Offering  a  concise  translation  of  the  above,  we  shall  make  brief  indications  to 
Divine knowledge, this most important truth of belief, and refer detailed discussion of 
it to the Risale-i Nur.41 
Yes, just as mercy shows itself as clearly as the sun through the  

                                             

38 Qur’an, 17:111. 
39 And God’s is the highest similitude: like all-encompassing light is necessary to the sun. 
40 Qur’an, 67:14. 
41 The remaining part of this treatise was written while I was suffering from a terrible illness, a 

result of being poisoned, such as I had never previously experienced in my life. My faults should 
therefore be looked on tolerantly. Husrev may modify, change, and correct any parts he considers 
inappropriate. 

 

610

(PBUH)  Ascension 

wonders of sustenance and proves decisively a Most Merciful and Compassionate One 
behind  the  veil  of  the  Unseen;  so  too,  through  the  wisdom,  purposes,  and  fruits  of 
order  and  balance  in  things,  knowledge,  which  is  mentioned  in hundreds of Qur’anic 
verses and in one respect is the chief of the sacred seven attributes, displays itself like 
the light of the sun, making known with certainty the existence of One Knowledgeable 
of  All  Things.  Yes,  the  comparison  between  ordered,  measured  art,  which  points  to 
man’s  consciousness  and  knowledge,  and  man’s  fine  creation,  which  indicates  the 
knowledge and wisdom of man’s Creator, resembles the comparison between the tiny 
glow of the fire-fly on a dark night and the encompassing light of the sun at noon. 
Now,  before  explaining  the  evidences  of  Divine  knowledge,  we  shall  mention  briefly 
the  sacred  conversation  which  took  place  during  the  Prophet’s  Ascension.  For 
Muhammad’s 
its 
manifestations in the universe, the sacred attribute of knowledge shows the Most Pure 
and  Holy  One  most  clearly.  When  on  that  night  he  received  the  Divine  address  in 
God’s presence, since he had been sent as an envoy on behalf of all living beings and 
every sort of creature, instead of giving the greeting (al-salam) of conscious beings, he 
said: “Salutations, blessings, benedictions and supplications, and good words — all are 
God’s,”42  thus  offering  to  his  Creator  the  creatures’  gifts,  showing  the  manner  they 
make known their Sustainer through the manifestations of the attribute of knowledge. 
That  is,  with  the  four  words  “Salutations,  blessings,  benedictions  and  supplications, 
and  good  words”  he  was  alluding  to  the  salutations,  congratulations,  worship,  and 
recognition  of  the  One  All-Knowing of the Unseen of the four main groups of living 
beings  which  they  offer  through  the  manifestations  of  pre-eternal  and  post-eternal 
knowledge. For this reason, the recitation of this sacred conversation of the Ascension 
in its broad meaning has become an obligatory part of the tashahhud for all Muslims. 
Referring detailed exposition of that sacred conversation to the Risale-i Nur, we shall 
explain one meaning of it in the form of four very brief indications. 

indicates  and 

through 

testifies 

that, 

The  First    is  “Salutations  to  God”  (al-tahiyyatu  lillah).  Briefly,  its  meaning  is 
this:  for  example,  a master craftsman invents a wonderful machine with his profound 
knowledge  and  miraculous  intelligence,  and  everyone  who  sees  it  applauds  and 
congratulates  the  craftsman,  and  praising  and  saluting  him,  offers  him  gifts  both 
material  and  immaterial.  The  machine  too,  by  displaying  the  craftsman’s  wondrously 
subtle  art,  and  skill  and  knowledge,  and  working  perfectly  in  exactly  the  way  he 
wanted,  

                                             

42 For further discussion, see The Sixth Ray, in the present work. [Tr.] 

 

611

applauds him through the tongue of its being, in effect greeting him and offering him 
immaterial  gifts.  In  exactly  the  same  way,  all  the  species  of  living  beings  in  the 
universe,  together  with  all  their  individual  members,  are  in  every  respect miraculous, 
wonderful machines, which —like conscious beings, men, and jinn and angels, applaud 
and  salute  their  Maker  verbally—  through  the  tongues  of  their  beings  and  lives 
applaud  and  salute  their  craftsman,  the  All-Glorious  Maker,  Who  makes  Himself 
known  through  the  profound  and  subtle  manifestations  of  His  all-comprehending 
knowledge, which sees the relationship of everything with everything else, and knows 
all  the  things  necessary  for  the  life  of  each  and  conveys  them  to  it at  the  right  time. 
Greeting  Him,  the  beings  declare:  “Salutations  to  God!”  They  worshipfully  offer the 
price of their lives directly to their Creator, Who knows all creatures together with all 
their  states.  On  the  night  of  the  Ascension,  in  the  name  of  all  living  creatures, 
Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be upon him)  said “Salutations  to God!” instead of 
the greeting of peace in the presence of the Necessarily Existent One, and offered the 
salutations, gifts, and greetings of all those species of living beings. 

Yes, just as with its order and balance, an ordinary regular machine undoubtedly 
shows  a  painstaking,  skilful  craftsman;  so  each  of  the  numberless  living  machines 
which fill the universe displays a thousand and one miracles of knowledge. Whatever 
the comparison between the light of the sun and the feeble glow of the fire-fly, that is 
the comparison of the former and the brilliance with which, through the manifestations 
of  knowledge,  the  living  beings  testify  to  the  necessary  existence  of  their  eternal 
Maker and Craftsman, and His fitness to be worshipped. 

Tbe  Second  Sacred  Word  from  the  Ascension  is  “blessings”  (al-mubarakat). 
Since according to Hadiths, the ritual prayers are the believer’s ascension43 and receive 
the  manifestation  of  the  supreme  Ascension;  and  since  the  traveller  found  in  every 
world  his  Creator,  the  One  Knowing  of  the  Unseen,  through  His  attribute  of 
knowledge;  accompanying  the  traveller,  we  shall  enter  the  broad  world  of  blessed 
things  and  “blessings,”  which  make  those  who  behold  them  declare:  “How  great are 
God’s  blessings!”  Like  the  traveller,  we  shall  behold  that  world  of  “blessed  beings” 
and  foremost  the  innocent,  blessed  infants  of  beings  with  spirits,  and  the  seeds  of 
animate creatures, which are the tiny containers of the programmes of their lives, and 
through  studying  them  shall  attempt  to  know  our  Creator  with  ‘the  knowledge  of 
certainty,’  through  the  miraculous,  subtle  manifestations  of  His  sacred  attribute  of 
knowledge.  

                                             

the prayers converses with his Sustainer.”) 

43 Bukhari, Salat, 39; Musnad, ii, 34, 36, 67, 129. (With the meaning of “The one who performs 

 

612

Yes,  with  our  own  eyes  we  see  that  through  the  knowledge  of  an  All-Wise  and 
Knowledgeable  One,  all  those  innocent  young  and  blessed  minute  treasuries  and 
boxes,  —both  altogether  and  singly—  suddenly  awaken  and  stir  into  motion,  and 
proceed towards the aim of their creation. They cause those who see them as they are 
in  reality  to  exclaim:  “May  God  bless  these  a  thousand  times  over!  What  endless 
wonders God has willed!” 

For example, all seeds, eggs, sperm, and grains have a precise order which springs 
from knowledge; and the order is within a perfect balance, which arises from skill; and 
the  balance  is  within  a  constant  reordering,  and  the  reordering  is  within  a  constant 
measuring and balancing; and the measuring and balancing are within a distinguishing 
and  nurturing,  each  possessing  marks  intentionally  distinguishing  it  from  its  fellows; 
and this distinguishing and nurturing are within an artful decorating and adorning; and 
this adorning is within the giving of wise, appropriate, perfect forms and members; and 
this  giving  of  form  is  together  with  differences  in  the  flesh  and  edible  parts  of  those 
creatures  and  fruits,  for  the  purpose  of  generously  gratifying  the  tastes  of  those 
desiring sustenance; and this is within miraculous embroideries and adornments which 
reflect  knowledge  and  are  all  different;  and  this  is  together  with  pleasing  smells  and 
delicious  tastes  which  are  all different. Thus, through the unfolding and development 
of  all  these  forms  with  perfect  orderliness  and  distinction,  and  while  being  different, 
without  fault  or  error  in  absolute  profusion,  and  with  absolute  speed  and  over  an 
infinite  area,  and  with  this  wondrous  situation  continuing  throughout the seasons; all 
those  blessed  beings,  singly  and  altogether,  demonstrate  visibly  through  the  above 
fifteen tongues the marvels of their Craftsman’s skills and His miraculous knowledge, 
making  known  as  clearly  as  the  sun  the  One  All-Knowing  of  the  Unseen,  their 
Necessarily  Existent  Maker.  It  was  because  of  this  truly  brilliant  and  extensive 
testimony  of  theirs  and  congratulations  of  their  Maker,  that  on  the  night  of  the 
Ascension  when  speaking  on  behalf  of  all  creatures,  Muhammad  (PBUH)  used  the 
word “blessings” instead of the greeting of peace. 

The  Third  Word  is  “benedictions”  (al-salawat).  This  sacred  word,  which  was 
spoken during the supreme Ascension of Muhammad (PBUH), hundreds of millions of 
believers offer to the Divine Court every day at least ten times in the tashahhud during 
the  obligatory  prayers,  which  are  the  believers’  ascension.  They  proclaim  it  to  the 
universe.  Since  all  the  truths  of  the  Ascension  have  been  proved  in  the  Thirty-First 
Word in most powerful and decisive fashion, even to obdurate, atheist deniers, which 
it in part addresses, for the proofs and details  

 

613

we  refer you to that Word, and here, extremely concisely, we shall take a look at the 
strange  world  of  the  various  sorts of conscious beings and beings with spirits, which 
illustrates the broad meaning of this Third Word of the Ascension. We shall also try to 
understand  by  means  of  the  manifestation  of  His  pre-eternal  knowledge,  the  perfect 
mercy  and  compassion  of  our  Creator,  and  the  vastness  of  His  power  and  all-
encompassing will, within His existence and unity. 

Yes,  we  see  in  this  world  that  even  if  not  consciously  and  with  their  minds,  by 
nature  all  beings  with spirits feel and perceive that despite their boundless impotence 
and  weakness,  they  have  innumerable  enemies  and  things  detrimental  to  them,  and 
despite  their  infinite  want  and  need,  they  have  endless  needs  and  desires.  Since  their 
power and capital are insufficient to meet even a thousandth of these, they cry out and 
weep with all their strength, and by their nature implore and entreat. Each with its own 
particular  voice  and  tongue  offers  supplications,  entreaties,  prayers  of  a  sort,  and 
benedictions  to  One  All-Knowing  and  All-Powerful.  Then  while  seeking  refuge  His 
Court,  we  see  that  suddenly  an  All-Wise  and  Powerful  One  Who  is  Absolutely 
Knowing and perceives all the needs of those crying out, understands their plaints and 
plight, and hears their innate petitions and supplications, comes to their assistance and 
does  all  that  they  wish.  He  transforms  their  weeping  into  smiles  and  their  cries  into 
thanks.  This  wise,  knowing,  compassionate  assistance  makes known  in  truly  brilliant 
fashion through the manifestations of knowledge and mercy, an Assisting Answerer of 
Prayer,  a  Munificent  and  Compassionate  One.  During  the  Supreme  Ascension, 
Muhammad  (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him),  and  during  the  prayers,  the  lesser 
ascension, his community, all declare “Benedictions and supplications, and good words 
—all  are  God’s,”  which  has  the  meaning  of  offering  specifically  to  Him  all  the 
benedictions and worship of the world of beings with spirits. 

The  Fourth  Sacred  Word  is  “Good  words—all  are  God’s!” (al-tayyibat lillah). 
Since many of the truths of the Risale-i Nur have been imparted to me while reciting 
the  tesbihat  following  the  prayers,  quite  simply  I  have  been  driven  involuntarily  to 
explain  by  means  of  brief  indications  the  truths  associated  with  both  Sura  al-Fatiha, 
and the words of the tashahhud. 

The sacred word “good words,” which was spoken during Muhammad’s (PBUH) 
Ascension, refers to the good words and deeds and worship of those with knowledge 
of  God  and  the  believers,  and  of  men,  jinn,  angels,  and  spirit  beings,  who  possess 
universal consciousness, with which they beautify the universe. They look to the world 
of  beauties,  and  understand  fully  the  infinite  beauties  of  the  eternal  Absolutely 
Beauteous  

 

614

One  and  the  perpetual  beauties  of  His  Names,  which  adorn  the  universe,  and  they 
respond  to  them  with  passion  and  ardour  and universal worship. This  word refers to 
the endless good words they utter to their Creator through the fragrant odours of their 
shining  belief,  extensive  knowledge  of  Him,  and  praise  and  laudation.  Since  good 
words in this meaning were spoken during the Ascension, every day without wearying 
the whole Umma repeats that sacred word in the tashahhud.  

Yes,  the  universe  is  the  mirror  of  an  infinite,  sempiternal  beauty  and  loveliness, 
and  consists  of  manifestations  of  it.  All  the  beauties  and  perfections  of  the  universe 
come from that eternal beauty and become beautiful through their connection with it, 
and increase in value. The universe would otherwise be a ruin, a house of sorrows, a 
place of utter confusion. Their connection with that beauty is understood through the 
knowledge  and  affirmation of men, angels, and spirit beings, who are the heralds and 
announcers of the sovereignty of the Godhead. It was even imparted to me that there 
is a strong possibility that in order to broadcast everywhere the beautiful, sweet praise 
and  laudation  of  those  heralds  and  their  extolling  the  One  they  worship, and to send 
them up to the Sublime Throne and present those good words at the Divine Court, the 
element  of  the  air  has  been  given  a  truly  strange  and  wondrous  state  whereby  its 
particles, like soldiers under orders, are miniscule tongues and ears. 

Thus,  just  as  through  their  belief  and  their  worship,  men  and  the  angels  make 
known  the  All-Glorious  All-Worshipped  One;  so  through  making  each  of  those 
announcers a microcosm connected to the whole universe through the comprehensive 
capacities,  wondrous  faculties,  and  subtleties  of  knowledge  He  has  given  them,  that 
All-Glorious and Wise One makes Himself known in brilliant fashion. For example, He 
shows  Himself  as  clearly  as  the  sun  by  creating  numerous  wonderful  machines  in  a 
space  the  size  of  a  walnut  in  man’s  tiny  head  such  as  his  faculties  of  memory, 
imagination, and thought, and by making his memory into a large library.44 

We shall now allude to a very brief meaning of the Arabic piece mentioned above 
which  points  out  universal  proofs  of  all-encompassing  knowledge,  comprises 
innumerable proofs, bringing them together and making them one extensive proof, and 
demonstrates  all-encompassing  knowledge  through  fifteen evidences. We shall give a 
sort of translation of the piece. 

                                             

Husrev’s duty of translation. 

44 My severe illness does not permit me to continue; this is only a source and assistant to 

 

615

The First of Fifteen Evidences: “The balanced order” 

The measured regularity and balanced order observed in all creatures testify to an 
all-encompassing knowledge. Yes, there being in all things —from the universe, which 
resembles  an  orderly  palace,  and  the  solar  system,  and  the  page  of  the  air,  whose 
particles display an astonishing order in the broadcasting of words and sounds, and the 
face  of  the  earth,  which  every  spring  with  perfect  order  and  regularity  raises  three 
hundred thousand different species, to the members, cells, particles, and bodily systems 
of all living beings— a balanced order and perfect regularity, which are the works of a 
profound,  comprehensive,  unfailing  knowledge,  means  that  they  testify  in  extremely 
clear and decisive manner to an all-encompassing knowledge. 

The Second Evidence: “And regular balance” 

In  all  the  creatures  in  the  universe,  particular,  universal,  from  the  planets  to  the 
red  and  white  corpuscles  in  blood,  in  everything,  there  is  an  exceedingly  orderly 
measure  and  appropriate  balance  which  point  self-evidently  to  an  all-encompassing 
knowledge  and  testify to it decisively. Yes, we see for instance that the members and 
bodily  systems  of  a  fly  or  human  being,  and  even  the  cells  of  the  body  and  red  and 
white  corpuscles  in  the  blood,  are  placed  with  so  sensitive  a  balance  and  fine  a 
measure,  and  they  are  so  fitting  and  suitable  for  each  other,  and  their  mutual 
proportion  with  the  other  members  of  the  body  is  so  orderly,  and  they  are  in  such 
harmony  with  them,  that  it  is  in  no  way  possible that  one  lacking  infinite knowledge 
could have given them those situations. 

Similarly, a balance so perfect and measure so regular and unfailing govern in all 
living creatures and sorts of creatures from minute particles to the planets of the solar 
system  that  they  prove  conclusively  an  all-encompassing  knowledge  and  testify  to  it 
with  complete  clarity.  This  means that all the evidences for knowledge are evidences 
also  for  the  existence  of  the  All-Knowing  One.  Since  it  is  impossible  and  precluded 
that  there  should  be  an  attribute  without  the  one  it  qualifies,  all  the  proofs  of 
knowledge  form a powerful and completely certain supreme proof of the Pre-Eternal 
All-Knowing One’s necessary existence. 

The Third Evidence: “And the general, purposeful wisdom” 

In  all the creativity and activity in the universe, and in all the changes, raising to 
life,  employing  in  duties  and  discharging  from  them,  all  creatures  and  all  species  of 
creatures have functions, uses, and purposes which are so intentional and knowing that 
they leave no room for chance. We see that with respect to creation one who does not 
possess all- 

 

616

encompassing  knowledge  could  in  no  way  lay  claim  to  any  of  them.  For  example, 
although  it  is  only  a  piece  of flesh, together with its two main functions, the  tongue, 
which is one of man’s hundred members —man being only one of innumerable animate 
creatures— is the means to hundreds of instances of wisdom, results, fruits, and uses. 
Its  functions  of  tasting  foods,  recognizing  all  their  different  savours,  informing  the 
body  and  the  stomach,  being  an  exacting  inspector  of  the  kitchens  of  Divine  mercy, 
and  an  accurate  interpreter  and  telephone  exchange  for  the  heart,  spirit,  and  mind  in 
the  function  of  speech  all  point  in  most  brilliant  and  decisive  manner  to  all-
encompassing knowledge. If through its purposes and fruits a single tongue furnishes 
such  evidence,  innumerable  tongues  and  innumerable  living  beings,  infinite  creatures, 
point  to  and  testify  to  an  infinite  knowledge  with  the  clarity  and  certainty  of  the 
noonday  sun.  They  proclaim  that  there  is  nothing  at  all  outside  the  bounds  of  the 
knowledge of the One All Knowing of the Unseen, or outside His wisdom and will. 

The Fourth Evidence: “And all-embracing, particular favours” 

The  favours  and  instances  of  compassion  and  protection  bestowed  on  all  living 
creatures in the world of conscious beings, on every species and individual, particularly 
and  appropriately,  point  self-evidently  to  an  all-encompassing  knowledge,  and  offer 
innumerable testimonies to the necessary existence of One Gracious and All-Knowing 
Who knows those who receive the favours and their needs. 

NOTE:  The  explanation  of  the  words  of  the  Arabic  piece,  which  is  the 
summary  and  essence  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  indicates  the  truths  which  the 
Risale-i Nur —being distilled from the Qur’an— has taken from the flashes 
of Qur’anic verses, and particularly the proofs and evidences for knowledge, 
will,  and  power.  For  the  Risale-i  Nur  expounds the scholarly proofs which 
the  Arabic  words  indicate.  This  means  that  rather  than  being  elucidations, 
explanations, and translations of those Arabic words, each of these scholarly 
proofs  explains  an  indication  and  fine  point  made  by  numerous  Qur’anic 
verses. 

To  return  to  our  main  question.  Yes,  with  our  own  eyes  we see that there is an 
All-Knowing  and  Compassionate  One  Who  knows  us and all beings with spirits, and 
knowing  them,  protects  them,  and  knows  all  their  needs  and  plaints,  and  knowing 
them comes to their assistance with His favours. One out of numberless examples: the 
general  and  particular  favours  bestowed  on  man  as  sustenance,  medicines,  and  the 
minerals  he  needs  point  most  clearly  to  an  all-encompassing  knowledge,  offering 
testimonies  to  a  Most  Merciful  and  Compassionate  One  to  the  number  of  foods, 
medicines, and minerals. Yes, wise and purposive works like the  

 

617

feeding  of  man,  and  particularly  of  the  helpless  and  infants,  and  especially  their 
conveying  from  the  kitchen  of  the  stomach  the  nutrients  necessary  for  all  their 
members and even their cells, and the mountains being pharmacies and stores of all the 
minerals necessary for man, could only occur through an all-encompassing knowledge. 
Aimless  chance,  blind  force,  deaf  nature,  and  lifeless,  unconscious  causes  and  the 
simple, overwhelming elements could in no way interfere in this feeding, administering, 
preservation,  and  planning,  which  is  knowing,  percipient,  wise,  compassionate,  and 
gracious.  Apparent  causes  such as those are merely employed and utilized within  the 
bounds of the knowledge and wisdom of One possessing absolute knowledge, and at 
His command and with His permission, as a veil to the dignity of Divine power. 

The Fifth and Sixth Evidences: ‘And the regular decrees and fruitful determining’ 

The  forms  and  proportions  of  all  things,  particularly  plants,  trees,  animals,  and 
men have been cut out with skilful art according to the principles of Divine decree and 
determining,  which  are  two  sorts  of  pre-eternal  knowledge,  sewn  in  a  way  entirely 
appropriate to the stature of each, and  clothed on them perfectly. Each is given most 
well-ordered,  regular,  and  wise  shapes.  These  singly  and  all  together  point  to  an 
infinite knowledge and testify to their number to an All-Knowing Maker. 

Yes,  out  of  innumerable  examples,  we  look  at  only  a  single  tree  and  a  human 
individual,  and  we  see  that    both  outwardly  and  inwardly  the  fruit-bearing  tree  and 
multi-membered  man  have  been  delimited  by  unseen  compasses  and  a  subtle  pen  of 
knowledge,  and  that  each  of  their  members  have  been  given perfectly ordered fitting 
forms so that they may produce the required fruits and results and perform the duties 
of their natures. As for this, since it could occur only through infinite knowledge, they 
testify  to  the  number  of  plants  and  animals  to  the  necessary  existence  and  boundless 
knowledge  of  a  Maker  and  Giver  of  Form,  an  All-Knowing  Determiner  Who  knows 
the  relationships  of  everything  with  everything  else  and  keeps  these  in  view,  and 
knows the definition through the compasses and pen of the decree and determining of 
pre-eternal knowledge of the outsides and insides of their fellow-men and fellow-trees 
and their species, and of their measured proportions and form, and they testify to the 
One Who does this. 

 

618

The  Seventh  and  Eighth  Evidences:  ‘And  the  specified  appointed  hour  of  death 
and fixed, regular sustenance’ 

Superficially,  the  appointed  hour  and  sustenance  appear  to  be  un-known  and 
unspecified, but for an important instance of wisdom under the veil of vagueness, the 
appointed hour is determined and specified on the page of every living being’s destiny 
in the notebook of pre-eternal Divine decree and determining; it can be neither brought 
forward nor delayed. There are numerous evidences that the sustenance of every living 
being  is  also  appointed  and  determined  and  inscribed  on  the  tablets  of  decree  and 
determining. For example, a huge tree leaving behind when it dies its seed, which is its 
spirit of a sort, to continue its duties in its place, and this occurring through the wise 
law  of  an  All-Knowing  Preserver;  and  milk,  the  sustenance  of  infants  and  young, 
flowing forth from breasts, and its appearing from between blood and execrement, and 
pouring into their mouths pure and clean without being polluted; reject decisively the 
possibility of chance and shows clearly that they occur through the compassionate law 
of an All-Knowing and Compassionate Provider. You can make an analogy with these 
two small examples for all living creatures and beings with spirits. 

This  means  that  in  reality  both  the  appointed  hour  of  death  is  specified  and 
determined,  and  each  person’s  sustenance  has  been  determined  and  recorded  in  the 
notebook  of  his  destiny.  But  for  most  important  instances  of  wisdom,  both  the 
appointed  hour  and  sustenance  are  concealed  behind  the  veil  of  the  Unseen,  and 
appear to be to be vague, unspecified, and apparently bound to coincidence. For if the 
appointed hour had been specified like the setting of the sun, the first half of life would 
be  passed  in  absolute  heedlessness  and  be  lost  by  not  working  for  the  hereafter,  and 
the second half would passed in ghastly terror, as one was as though every day taking 
one  more  step  towards  the  gallows  of  death,  exacerbating  the  calamity  of  death  a 
hundredfold.  For  which  reason  the  calamities one suffers, and the resurrection of the 
dead,  which  is  the  world’s  appointed  hour  of  death,  have  mercifully  been  left  in 
concealment in the Unseen.  

As for sustenance, since after life itself it is the greatest treasury of bounties, and 
the richest source of thanks and praise, and the most comprehensive mine of worship, 
supplication,  and  entreaty,  it  has  apparently been  left  vague  and  shown  to  be  tied  to 
chance.  For  in  this  way  the  door  of  seeking  sustenance  through  the  intercession  of 
continuously  seeking  refuge  at  the  Divine  Court,  and  pleading  and  beseeching,  and 
praise  and  thanks,  is  not  closed.  For if it had been clearly specified, its nature would 
have  been  altogether  changed.  The  doors  of  thankful,  grateful  supplications  and 
entreaties, indeed of humble worship, would have been closed. 

 

619

The  Ninth  and  Tenth  Evidences:  ‘And  the  regular  excellence  and  careful 
adornment’ 

All  the  beautiful  creatures  which  display  the  manifestations  of  an  eternal  beauty 
and loveliness especially in the spring on the face of the earth, for instance the flowers, 
fruits, small birds and flies, and especially the gilded, sparkling flying insects — in their 
creation,  forms,  and  members  are  such  a  miraculous  skill  and  precision,  such  a 
wonderful art, mastery, and excellence, and all sorts of shapes and tiny machines which 
show  their  craftsman’s  wondrous  proficiency,  that  they  point  decisively  to  a  truly 
comprehensive  knowledge,  and  —let  there  be  no  mistake  in  the  expression—  an 
extremely  skilful,  scientific  innate  knowledge,  and  testify  that  it  is  impossible  that 
aimless  chance  and  unconscious,  confused  causes  could  interfere.  While  the  phrase 
“and  careful  decoration”  means  that  those  fine  artefacts  are  adorned  in  a  way  so 
agreeable, are decorated in a way so sweet, display a beauty and art so attractive, that 
their  maker  could  create  these  works  only  through  an infinite  knowledge.  He  knows 
the best manner of everything, and wishes to display to conscious beings the beauty of 
exquisite craftsmanship and the perfection of its beauty. For He creates and decorates 
the most insignificant flower and tiniest fly with the greatest care, skill, and art, giving 
them  the  greatest  importance.  This  attentive  adorning  and  beautifying  self-evidently 
point  to  a  boundless  and  all-encompassing  knowledge,  and  testify  to  the  number  of 
those beauties to the necessary existence of an All-Knowing and Beauteous Maker . 

The  Eleventh  Evidence,  which  comprises  five  universal  evidences  and  proofs:  ‘The 
utterly  perfect  order,  balance,  and  total  distinction  with  absolute ease,  and  the 
creation  of  things  in  unlimited  abundance  with  absolute  skill  and  speed  with 
absolute  balance,  to  an  unrestricted  extent  with  perfect  beauty  and  art,  over 
infinite  distances  with  complete  congruence,  with  unlimited  intermingling  yet 
with complete distinction.’ 
This  evidence  is  another  and  better  form  of  the  similar  lines  at  the  end  of  the 
Arabic  piece  above,  but  because  of  my  severe  illness  it  explains  the  five  or  six 
evidences it comprises in the form of a very brief indication only. 

Firstly:  Throughout  the  earth  we  see  the  making  of  wondrous  living  machines, 
some  instantaneously  and some in a minute or two, in orderly and measured fashion, 
each  different  from  its  fellows,  with  the  greatest  ease,  arising  from  a  thorough 
knowledge  and  skill,  all  of  which  point  to  an  infinite  knowledge  and  testify  that  the 
perfection  of  knowledge  is  proportionate  to  the  ease  resulting  from  the  skill  and 
knowledge in the art. 

 

620

Secondly:  Perfect  creations  of  the  greatest  art  within  the  greatest  profusion  and 
multitude, point to a boundless knowledge within an infinite power, and testify to their 
number to One Who is Absolutely Knowing and Powerful. 

Thirdly: Creations which are of the finest balance and measure despite being made 
with  absolute  speed,  point  to  a  boundless  knowledge  and  testify  to  their  number  to 
One Absolutely Knowing and Absolutely Powerful. 

Fourthly:  The  making  of  innumerable  animate  beings  on  the  broad  face  of  the 
earth  with  the  greatest  craft,  adornment,  and  beauty  of  art  despite  their  wide  extent, 
points  to  an  all-encompassing  knowledge  which  confusing  nothing,  sees  all  things 
together,  and  for  which  nothing  is  an  obstacle  to  anything  else.  It  testifies  too  that 
singly  and  altogether  they  are  the  artefacts  of  One  Knowing  of  All  Things,  an 
Absolutely Powerful One. 

Fifthly:  The  coming  into  being  of  the  members  of  a  species  which  are  far  from 
each other, with one in the east, one in the west, one in the north, and one in the south, 
in  the  same way, both resembling each other and differing, could occur only through 
the infinite power of One Absolutely Knowing and Absolutely Powerful Who governs 
the whole universe, and through His infinite knowledge, which encompasses all beings 
together  with  all  their  states,  thus  pointing  to  an  all-encompassing  knowledge  and 
testifies to One All-Knowing of the Unseen. 

Sixthly:  The  creation  of  a  great  multitude  of  living  machines  in  confusing 
circumstances  and  dark  places,  for  example  seeds  under  the  ground,  without 
confusion,  despite  their  similarity  and  all  being  mixed  up  together,  in  miraculous 
fashion  without  neglecting  any  single  one  of  any  sort,  together  with  all  their 
distinguishing  features,  points  as  clearly  as  the  sun  to  pre-eternal  knowledge  and 
testifies  as  brilliantly  as  daylight  to  the  creativity  and  dominicality  of One Absolutely 
Powerful  and  Absolutely  Knowing.  For  the  details  we  refer  you  to  the  Risale-i  Nur 
and here cut a long story short. 

Now  we  begin  the  question  of  “Will,”  which  is  in  Hulâsatü’l-Hulâsa,  the 

summary of The Supreme Sign:45, 46 

This  piece  consists  of  one  long  universal  proof  of  Divine  will,  which  comprises 

many of the proofs of Will. In a short translation of it, we set  

                                             

not given. [Tr.] 

45 Since the Turkish is given for the Arabic piece here, the English translation of the Arabic is 

46 Hulâsatü’l-Hulâsa: The ‘sum and substance’ in Arabic of The Supreme Sign, which describes 
in thirty-three degrees how all the realms of creation testify to their Creator’s existence and unity. It is 
included in the collection of invocations and supplications called Hizb Anwar al-Haqa’iq al-Nuriyya, 
which includes Jawshan al-Kabir. [Tr.] 

 

621

out  evidence  proving  decisively  Divine  will  and  choice  and  volition.  All  the  above 
evidences for Divine knowledge are also evidences for will. For the manifestations and 
works of knowledge and will are apparent together in all creatures. 

The meaning of the above Arabic piece in brief: 
Everything  exists  through  His  will  and  volition.  What  He  wills  occurs,  what  He 
does  not  will  does  not  occur.  If  He  did  not  will  it,  nothing  would  occur.  A  proof  is 
this:  

We see that among infinite, confused possibilities and various fruitless ways, amid 
intervening  and  mutually opposing  elements  which  flow  like floods causing chaos, in 
the  midst  of  numerous  others  resembling  themselves,  which  is  the  cause  of  disorder, 
every creature with its own specific essence, particular attributes, individual character, 
and  distinctive  form,  is  taken  within  a precise, perfect, regular order; all its members 
and organs are weighed up with a sensitive, exact measure and balance and attached to 
it; its mutually opposing members are created living and with extreme art from simple, 
lifeless matter. For example, a human being is created with a hundred different organs 
from  a  droplet  of  fluid,  and  a  bird  is  made  with  numerous  different  members  and 
organs from a simple egg and clothed in a miraculous form, and a tree is drawn out of 
a  tiny  seed  comprising  simple,  lifeless  carbon,  nitrogen,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen, 
together with its branches and twigs and various members and parts, and dressed in an 
orderly,  fruitful  form.  This  self-evidently,  indubitably,  decisively,  and  necessarily 
proves  that  all  those  creatures  together  with  all  their  parts  and  particles,  form  and 
nature,  are  given  their  particular  perfect  states  through  the will, choice, volition, and 
intention of One possessing Absolute Power. It proves too that everything is governed 
by  an  all-embracing  will.  These  single  creatures  pointing  in  this  indubitable  way  to 
Divine will shows that all creatures offer testimony to their number with a certainty as 
clear as the sun at noon to Divine will encompassing all things, and that they comprise 
numberless proofs of the necessary existence of an All-Powerful Possessor of Will. 

All  the  evidences  for  Divine  knowledge  mentioned  above  are  also  evidences  for 
Divine will, since both function together with power. One cannot be without the other. 
Just  as  all  the  correspondence  and  conformities  between the members of species and 
sorts of beings indicate that their Maker is One and the same;  so their features being 
distinctive  and  different  from  each  other  in  wise  and  purposive  fashion  indicates 
definitely  that  their  Single  Maker  of  Unity  acts  with  will  and  choice.  He  creates 
everything with will, choice, volition, and intention. 

 

622

This  marks the end of my explanations of the Arabic piece’s meaning, which sets 
forth one universal proof of Divine will. I had intended to write many more important 
points,  as  for  the  question  of  Divine  knowledge,  but  my  brain  was  exhausted  due to 
the illness I was suffering as a result of being poisoned, so it was postponed to another 
time. 

The Arabic piece about Divine power: 
God is Most Great! Through His power and will, greater than all things. For He 
is powerful over all things with absolute, all-encompassing power, necessary and 
intrinsic to His Most Pure and Holy Essence. It is impossible that the opposite of 
His  power  should  intervene  in  it,  for  it  has  no  degrees;  equal  before  it  are 
particles  and  stars, particulars and universals, the part and the whole, the seed 
and the tree, the world and man — through the mystery of the observable utterly 
perfect  order,  balance,  distinction,  and  precision,  together  with  the  ease  in  the 
absolute  abundance,  speed,  and  intermingling;  and  through  the  mysteries  of 
luminosity,  transparency,  reciprocity,  balance,  order,  and  obedience;  and 
through  the  mysteries  of  the  assistance  of  unity,  facility  of  unity,  and  the 
manifestation  of  oneness;  and  through  the  mysteries  of  necessity,  total 
detachment,  and  complete  otherness  of  essence;  and  through  the  mysteries  of 
unrestrictedness,  not  being  bound  by  space,  and  indivisibility;  and  through  the 
mysteries  of  the  transformation  of  obstacles  and  obstructions  into  means  of 
facility; and through the mystery of the intuition that the particular, the part, the 
seed and man are not inferior as regards art and eloquence to the star, and that 
the Creator of the universal, the whole, the tree, and the world is the Creator of 
the  former;  and  through  the  mystery  of  the  surroundings  and  wholes  inevitably 
being  in  the  grasp  of  the  Creator  of  the  things  which  are  surrounded  and  the 
parts, like the miniature inscribed beings similar to them, or ‘milked,’ extracted 
droplets,  for  they  and their likes are included in the former with the balance of 
His  knowledge,  or  are  ‘milked’  from  them  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of 
His  wisdom;  and  through  the  mystery  of  a  Qur’an  of  Dignity  inscribed  with 
particles of ether on an atom or minutest particle not being of less eloquence or 
wondrous  art  than  a  Qur’an  of  Grandeur  written  with  the  ink  of  the  stars  and 
suns on the page of the heavens; similarly, through their relation to the power of 
the  universe’s  Creator,  the  blooming  rose  not  being  of  less  eloquence  and  art 
than the star Venus; nor the ant being inferior to the elephant; nor the microbe 
inferior to the rhinoceros, nor is the bee inferior to the date-palm. Moreover, the 
extreme  ease  and  speed  in  the  creation  of  things  causes  the  people  of 
misguidance to confuse formation with self-formation,  

 

623

which necessitates innumerable impossibilities and is a delusion; while it proves 
to the people of guidance that in relation to the power of the universe’s Creator 
particles  and  the  stars  are  equal, may His glory be exalted, for there is no god 
but He; God is Most Great! 
Before giving a translation of this Arabic piece from the point of view of the truly 
vast question of Divine power, and a brief meaning of it, I shall disclose a truth which 
was imparted to me. It was like this:  

The existence of Divine power is more certain than the existence of the universe. 
Indeed,  singly  and  all  together  creatures  are  the  embodied  words  of  power;  they 
demonstrate its existence with ‘the vision of certainty.’ They testify to their number to 
the Absolutely Powerful One, the One qualified by  it. There is no need to prove that 
power with further proofs. But because it is one of the most important bases of faith, 
and the most necessary means to understanding the Qur’anic truths, and as claimed by 
the verse, 

Your creation and your resurrection is but as a single soul,47 

and  because  not  everyone  has  found  the  way  to  it  through  the  use  of  reason,  some 
people have remained bewildered and uncomprehending before power and others have 
denied it, and it is therefore necessary to prove an awesome truth concerning it. 

As for the above-mentioned basis, foundation, means, assertion, and truth, it is the 
meaning of the above verse. That is to say: “Men and jinn! The creation of all of you 
and  your  being  resurrected  and  raised  to  life  at  the  resurrection  is  as  easy  for  My 
power as the creation of a single individual!” Divine power creates the spring as easily 
as it creates a single flower. For that power, there is no difference between particular 
and  universal,  small  and  large,  many  and  few.  It  spins  planets  as  easily  as  it  spins 
particles. 

In  nine  ‘Steps’,  the  above  Arabic  passage  expounds  a  most  conclusive,  cogent 
proof  of  this  awesome  question.  Very  briefly,  its  meaning  is as follows. The basis of 
the steps is indicated by this: 

For  He  is  powerful  over  all  things  with  absolute,  all-encompassing  power, 
necessary and intrinsic to His Most Pure and Holy Essence; it is impossible that 
the  opposite  of  His  power  should  intervene  in  it,  for  it  has  no  degrees;  equal 
before  it  are  particles  and  stars,  particulars  and  universals,  the  part  and  the 
whole, the seed and the tree, the world and man. 

                                             

47 Qur’an, 31:28. 

 

624

That is,  Divine  power is such that it is powerful over all things, encompasses all 
things,  is  essential  to  the  Necessarily  Existent  One,  and  according  to  logic,  is 
“necessary” to Him; it is impossible that it should be separated from Him; there is no 
possibility  that  it  could  be.  Since  the  Most  Pure  and  Holy  Essence  possesses  such 
necessary  power,  impotence,  its  opposite,  could  certainly  in  no  way  intervene  in  it. 
Impotence  could  not  impinge  on  the  All-Powerful  Essence.  Since  the  existence  of 
degrees  in  a  thing  occurs  through  the intervention of its opposite —for example, the 
degrees and levels of heat occur through the intervention of cold, and the degrees of 
beauty, through the intervention of ugliness— impotence, the opposite of this essential 
power,  can  in  no  way  approach  it;  there  is  no  possibility  whatsoever  that  it  could. 
There  can  be  no  degrees  in that absolute power. Since there can be no degrees in it, 
stars and particles are equal to that power, and there are no differences for it between 
the part and the whole, or an individual and a species. The raising to life of a seed and 
a huge tree, and the universe and man, and one individual and all beings with spirits at 
the resurrection of the dead is equal in relation to that power, and all are equally easy. 
There is  no difference between great and small, many and few. Decisive witnesses to 
this  truth  are  the  perfect  art,  order,  balance,  distinction  and  profusion  that  we  see  in 
the creation of things with absolute speed, absolute ease, and complete facility. 

First Step  

Second Step 

Through the mystery of the observable utterly perfect order, balance, distinction, 
and  precision,  together  with  the  ease  in  the  absolute  abundance,  speed,  and 
intermingling. 
For the meaning of this, see the above truth. 

Through  the  mysteries  of  luminosity,  transparency,  reciprocity,  balance,  order, 
and obedience. 
For  detailed  explanation  of  this  we  refer  you  to  the  end  of  the  Tenth Word, the 
Twenty-Ninth  Word,  and  the  Twentieth  Letter,  and  here  make  only  a  brief  allusion. 
Just  as  with  respect  to  luminosity  and  through  dominical  power,  the  sun’s  light  is 
reflected  as  easily  on  the  surface  of  the  sea  and  in  all  its  bubbles  as  is  it  on  a single 
fragment  of  glass;  the  two  are  equal;  so  it  is  as  easy  for  the  luminous  power  of the 
Light  of  Lights  to  create  and  rotate  the  heavens  and  stars  as  it  is  to  create  flies  and 
particles and rotate them; neither presents any difficulties for it. 

Also,  just  as  through  the  quality  of  transparency  and  through  Divine  power,  the 

sun’s image is present with the same ease in a tiny mirror or in  

 

625

the pupil of the eye as, through the Divine command, its light is reflected on all shining 
things and droplets, and translucent motes, and on the surface of the sea; so too, since 
the inner faces of the essences of things are transparent and shining, the manifestation 
and effect of absolute power creates all living beings with the ease of creating a single 
individual; there is no difference between many and few, great and small. 

Also, if two walnuts of equal weight were placed on a pair of scales which were 
absolutely precise and large enough to weigh mountains, and a tiny seed was added to 
one of the walnuts, it would raise one of the pans to the height of a mountain-top and 
lower the other to the bottom of the valley with the same ease as raising one pan to the 
skies and lowering the other to the valley bottom if two mountains of equal weight had 
been  placed  in  the  pans  and  a  walnut  added  to  one.  In  exactly  the  same  way,  in the 
terminology  of  the  science  of  theology  (kalam),  contingency  is  equal  in  regard  to 
existence and non-existence. That is, if there is nothing to cause their existence, things 
which  are  not  necessary  but  contingent  are  equal  in  regard  to  existence  and  non-
existence; there is no difference. Few or many, big or small are the same in regard to 
this  contingency  and  equality.  Thus,  creatures  are  contingent,  and  since  within  the 
sphere of contingency their existence and non-existence are equal, it is as easy for the 
boundless  pre-eternal  power  of  the  Necessarily  Existent  One  to  give  existence  to  a 
single contingent being as to give all contingent beings existence and clothe everything 
in  an  appropriate  being,  spoiling  the  balance  of non-existence. And when  the being’s 
duties  are  completed,  He  takes  off  its  garment  of  external  existence  and  sends  it 
apparently  to  non-existence,  but  in  fact  to  an  existence  within  the  sphere  of  His 
knowledge. This means that if things are ascribed to the Absolutely Powerful One, the 
raising to life of the spring becomes as easy as that of a flower, and the raising to life 
of  all  mankind  at  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  as  easy  as  raising  to  life  a  single soul. 
Whereas if they are ascribed to causes, a flower becomes as difficult as the spring, and 
a fly as difficult as all living beings. 

Also,  through  the  mystery  of  order,  the  setting  in  motion  of  a  large  ship  or  an 
aeroplane  through  pressing  a button  with  one’s  finger  is  as  easy as setting in motion 
the  mainspring  of  a  clock by turning the key with one’s finger. So too since through 
the  principles  of  pre-eternal  knowledge,  and  laws  of  eternal  wisdom,  and  universal 
manifestations  of  dominical  will  and  its  specified  principles,  all  things,  universal  and 
particular,  large  and  small,  many  and  few,  have  been  given  an  immaterial  mould, 
particular measure and proportions, and sheer limits, they are entirely within the order 
of Divine knowledge and laws of Divine will. Certainly, it is as easy for the Absolutely 
Powerful One to rotate the solar system  

 

626

and cause the ship of the earth to voyage around its annual orbit through His infinite 
power  as  it  is for Him to make blood circulate in a body in orderly and wise fashion 
and  the  red  and  white  corpuscles  circulate  in the blood, and the particles circulate in 
the tiny corpuscles, for without difficulty He creates a human being together with his 
wondrous organs from a droplet of fluid on the pattern of the universe. This means, if 
ascribed  to  that  pre-eternal,  infinite  power,  the  creation  of  the  universe  is  as  easy  as 
the creation of a single human being. But if not ascribed to that power, it becomes as 
difficult  to  create a single human being together  with his wondrous organs, members 
and senses as to create the universe. 

Also,  through  the  mystery  of  obedience,  compliance,  and  conforming  to 
commands,  with  the  command  of  “Forward  march!”  a  commander  impels  a  single 
soldier to attack, and with the same command he drives forward to the attack a large, 
disciplined  army. So  too,  with  innate desire and eagerness resembling soldiers totally 
obedient  to  the  laws  of  Divine  will  and  subservient  to  the  signs  of  the  dominical 
creational commands, creatures are a thousand times more obedient than the soldiers 
of  an  army  —within  the  bounds  of  the  line  of  action  determined  by  pre-eternal 
knowledge  and  wisdom—  and  are  completely  compliant  and  subservient.  It  is 
therefore as easy through the dominical command of “Come into existence out of non-
existence  and  get  down  to  your  business!”  and  in  the  manner  determined  by 
knowledge and in the form specified by will, for power to clothe an individual animate 
being in an existence particular to it, and take it by the hand and bring it into being as it 
is to create the army of living beings of the spring and to assign them their duties. That 
is  to  say,  if  everything  is  attributed  to  that  power,  the  creation  of  the  entire  army of 
minute particles and divisions of stars is as easy and free of trouble as the creation of a 
single particle and single star. Whereas if attributed to causes, the creation of a particle 
in the pupil of a living being’s eye or in its brain together with its ability to perform its 
wondrous duties, would be as difficult and troublesome as that of the army of animals. 

Third Step 

Through  the  mysteries  of  the  assistance  of  unity,  facility  of  unity,  and  the 
manifestation of oneness. 
We shall look at the meaning of this by means of brief indications. That is, due to 
the  unity  of  sovereignty  and  all  his  subjects  acting  in  conformity  to  his  commands 
alone,  it  is  as easy for a ruler and commander-in-chief to govern a large country and 
numerous nation as it is to govern the people of a village. For due to the unity of his 
decree, the members of the nation become a means of facility just like the soldiers, and 
his com 

 

627

mands and laws are easily executed. Whereas if it was left to various rulers, in addition 
to  sinking  into  confusion,  to  govern  a  village,  or  even  a  household,  would  be  as 
difficult  as  governing  the  country.  And  since  the  obedient  nation  is  attached  to  the 
single  commander,  like  individual  soldiers,  through  the  strength  of  relying  on  the 
commander’s strength, and his ammunition stores and army, each may take an enemy 
king  captive  and  perform  works  far  exceeding  his  own  individual  strength.  His 
connection  with  the  ruler  obtains  for  him  an  infinite  strength  and  power,  so  that  he 
may perform great works. But if the relation is severed, he loses that vast strength, and 
with  his  own  petty  strength  performs  works  only  to  the  extent  of  the  arms  and 
ammunition  on  his  back.  For  if  it  was  required  of  him  to  perform  all  the  works  he 
carried  out  relying  on  the  power  of  his  connection  with  the  ruler,  he  would  have  to 
have in his arm the strength of the army and on his back all the ruler’s stores of arms 
and ammunition.  

In  exactly  the  same  way,  due  to  the  unity  of  His  sovereignty  and  absolute 
rulership,  the  Monarch  of  Pre-Eternity  and  Post-Eternity,  the  All-Powerful  Maker, 
creates  the  universe  as  easily  as  a  city,  and  raises  to  life  the  spring  as  easily  as  a 
garden, and raises to life all the dead at the resurrection as easily as creating the leaves, 
flowers,  and  fruits  of  the  garden’s  trees  in  the  spring.  He  easily  creates  a  fly  on  the 
pattern  of  an  eagle.  He  easily  makes  man  the  microcosm.  Whereas  if  ascribed  to 
causes,  a  microbe  would  be  as  difficult  as  a  rhinoceros,  and  a  fruit  as  difficult  as  a 
mighty tree. Perhaps too, every particle which performs its wondrous tasks in the body 
of a living creature would have to be given an eye that sees all things and knowledge 
that knows all things so that it could carry out those subtle and perfect vital duties. 

Also,  ease  and  facility  reach  such  a  degree  in  unity  that  they  become  necessary. 
For if the equipping of an army is from one hand, from one factory, it becomes as easy 
as  equipping  a  single  soldier.  Whereas  if  numerous  different  hands  interfere  and  the 
various  parts  of  the  equipment  are  all  brought  from different factories, quantitively a 
single  soldier’s  equipment  could  be  prepared  only  with  a  thousand  difficulties;  since 
numerous officers interfered, it would be as difficult as a thousand soldiers. Also, if the 
management  and  command  of  a  thousand  soldiers  is  given  to  a  single  officer,  in one 
respect  it  becomes  as  easy  as  a  single  soldier,  whereas  if  they  were  assigned  to  ten 
officers or the soldiers themselves, it would result in confusion and great difficulty.  

In  exactly  the  same  way,  if  all  things  are  attributed  to  the  Single  One  of  Unity, 
they  become  as  easy  as  a  single  thing.  But  if  they  are  attributed  to  causes,  a  single 
living  creature  becomes  as  difficult  as  the whole  earth,  and  perhaps  impossible.  This 
means that in unity ease and facilty are at  

 

628

the  level  of  necessity.  And  with  the  interference  of  numerous  hands,  the  difficulties 
amount to impossibility. 

As  it  is  said  in  Letters  (Mektûbat),  if  the  alternations  of  day  and  night,  and  the 
motions  of  the  stars,  and  the  seasons  of  the  year,  the  autumn,  winter,  spring,  and 
summer, are left to a single officer and organizer, that commander-in-chief commands 
the globe of the earth, which is a soldier: “Rise up, rotate, and travel!” Out of joy and 
delight at receiving the command, with two motions like a Mevlevi dervish in ectasy, it 
is  easily  the  means  to  the  daily  and  annual  changes  and  the  apparent,  imaginary 
movements of the stars, thus demonstrating the total ease and facility of unity. But if it 
is  left  not  to  the  single  commander  but  to  causes  and  the  caprices  of  the  stars,  and 
earth  is  told:  “You  stop  in  your  place  and  don’t  travel!”,  every  night  and every year 
thousands of stars and suns thousands of times larger than the earth would have to cut 
distances  of  thousands  of  millions  of  years,  so  that  through  their  travelling,  the 
situations of the earth and heavens such as the seasons and day and night, might come 
about. But it would be so difficult as to be impossible. 

The  phrase  And  the  manifestation  of  oneness  alludes  to  a  vast  and  extremely 
subtle,  profound,  and  extensive  truth.  Referring  explanation  and  proof  of  it  to  the 
Risale-i Nur, we shall here set out a single point by means of a comparison. 

Yes, just as through its light the sun illuminates the whole earth and is an example 
of unity, so through its image, reflection, seven-coloured light, and shape appearing in 
all the transparent things that face it, such as mirrors, it forms an example of oneness. 
If  the  sun  possessed  knowledge,  power,  and  will,  and  the  fragments  of  glass  and 
droplets and bubbles in which the tiny suns appeared had the capacity, through the law 
of Divine will, in each and next to each a complete sun would be present together with 
its image and attributes, as well as in all the other places. There being no deficiency in 
its power of disposal, through the command, effect, and word of dominical power, it 
would  be  the  cause  of  truly  extensive  manifestations,  thus  demonstrating  the 
extraordinary ease and facility of oneness. 

In  exactly  the  same  way,  just  as  in respect  of  His  unity,  the All-Glorious Maker 
looks through His knowledge, will, and power, which encompass all things, and is all-
present  and  all-seeing  everywhere,  so  with  respect  to  His  oneness  and  through  its 
manifestation,  He  is  present  together  with  His  Names  and  attributes  with  all  things, 
and  particularly  living  things,  so  that  easily,  in  an  instant,  He  creates  a  fly  on  the 
pattern  of  an  eagle  and  a  human  being  according  to  the  system  of  the  universe.  He 
creates living creatures  

 

629

in a way so miraculous that if all causes were to gather together, they could not make 
a  nightingale  or  a  fly.  And  the  One  Who  creates  the  nightingale,  is  the  One  Who 
creates all birds; and the One Who creates a human being could only be the One Who 
creates the universe. 

The Fourth and Fifth Steps 

Through the mysteries of necessity, total detachment, and complete otherness of 
essence;  and  the  mysteries  of  unrestrictedness,  not  being  bound  by  space,  and 
indivisibility. 
It  being  very  difficult to express the reality of these two steps to everyone, their 
meaning  will  be  explained  in  one  or  two  very  brief  points.  That  is,  in  relation  to the 
power  of  an Absolutely Powerful One Whose existence is at the degree of necessity, 
the most powerful and stable of the degrees of existence, and is pre-eternal and post-
eternal,  and  Who  is  totally  detached  from  and  free  of  materiality,  and  Whose  holy 
nature is totally different to all other natures, — in relation to His power, the stars are 
like  minute  particles,  and  the  resurrection  of  the dead like the spring, and to raise to 
life all men at the resurrection is as easy as raising to life a single soul. For as much as 
a fingernail from the levels of existence that are powerful may hold a mountain from an 
insubstantial  level  of  existence,  and  may  manipulate  it.  For  example,  a  mirror  and 
faculty of memory from the level of powerful, external existence may hold a hundred 
mountains  and  a  thousand  books  from  the  level  of  existence  of  the  World  of 
Similitudes  and  non-material  existence,  which  are  weak  and  insubstantial,  and  they 
may  have  disposal  over  them.  Thus,  however  inferior  as  regards  power  the  level  of 
existence of the World of Similitudes is to the level of external existence, the created, 
accidental  existences  of  contingent  beings  are  thousands  of  times  more  inferior  and 
weaker  than  a  pre-eternal,  everlasting,  necessary  existence,  so  that  through  the 
manifestation  of  a  particle  He  can  manipulate  a  world from the worlds of contingent 
beings.  Regretably,  for  the  time  being,  three  important  reasons  do  not  permit  me  to 
explain  this  lengthy truth and its fine points in full, so we refer it to the Risale-i Nur 
and another time. 

Sixth Step 

Through  the  mystery  of  the  transformation  of  obstacles  and  impediments  into 
means of facility. 
Through  a  law  of  the  manifestation  of  Divine  will  called  in  science  “the  knot  of 
life,” and of the creational command, and through the command and will being turned 
towards  them,  the  unconscious  branches  and  hard  twigs  of  a  huge  tree  do  not  form 
obstacles or impediments to the necessary  

 

630

substances  and  foods  which  pass  to  its  fruits,  leaves,  and  flowers  from  the  “knot  of 
life,”  which  is  like  the  tree’s  mainspring  and  stomach;  indeed,  they  facilitate  the 
process.  In  just  the  same  way,  since  all  [potential]  obstacles  in  the  creation  of  the 
universe and creatures cease being obstacles in the face of a manifestation of will and 
regard of the dominical command and become means of facility, eternal power creates 
the universe and all the species of creatures on the earth as easily as creating a single 
tree. Nothing at all is difficult for it. If all those acts of creation are not ascribed to that 
power, then the creation and administration of the single tree would be as difficult as 
the creation and administration of all trees, indeed, as the universe. For then everything 
would  become  obstacles  and  obstructions,  and  if  all  causes  were  to  gather  together, 
they could not send the necessary sustenance to the fruits, leaves, branches and twigs 
in orderly, regular fashion from the stomach and mainspring of a tree’s “knot of life,” 
which  proceeds  from  command  and  will.  Unless  all  the  parts  of  the  tree,  and  all  its 
particles even, were given an eye, all-encompassing knowledge, and wondrous power 
which  would  see  the  entire  tree  together with its parts and particles, and know them 
and assist them. 

So  climb  these  five  steps  and  take  a  look;  see  what  difficulties  —indeed, 
impossibilities—  are  present  in  unbelief  and  associating  partners  with  God,  and  how 
distant  they  are  from  reason  and  logic,  and  how  precluded  they  are.  Then  see  what 
ease  there  is  on  the  way  of  the  Qur’an,  indeed,  that  its  facility  is  at  the  degree  of 
necessity,  and  how  acceptable  and  reasonable  it  is,  and  what  certain  and  satisfying 
truth is found on its way, so certain as to be necessary. Understand this and say: “All 
praise be to God for the bounty of belief!” 

(The difficulties I was suffering and my indisposition caused the remaining part of 

this important step to be postponed.) 

Seventh Step 

And through the mystery that the particular, the part, the seed and man are not 
inferior  as  regards  art  and  eloquence  to  the  star,  the  universal,  the  whole,  the 
tree, and the world. 

[NOTE: The basis, mine, and sun of the truths contained in these nine Steps 
are  the  verses:  Say,  He  is  God,  the  One;  *  God,  the  Eternal  and  Ever-
Besought.48  They  are  brief  indications  to  flashes  from  the  manifestation  of 
Divine  oneness  and  eternal  besoughtedness.  Making  one  or  two  points,  we 
shall take a very brief look at the meaning of this Seventh Step, and for the 
details refer you to the Risale-i Nur.] 

                                             

48 Qur’an, 112:1-2. 

 

631

That  is,  a  particle  which  performs  wonderful  duties  in  the  eye  or  brain  is  not 
inferior to a star; nor is a part inferior to the whole; for instance, the brain and eye are 
not  inferior  to the  human  being  as  a  whole; nor with regard to beauty of  art and the 
marvels of its creation is a particular individual inferior to a universal species; nor with 
his  strange  members  and  faculties  is  a  man  inferior  to  all  the  animal  species;  nor  in 
regard  to  fine  craftsmanship  and  being  treasury-like,  and  resembling  an  index, 
programme,  and  memory,  is  a  seed  inferior  to  a  mighty  tree;  nor  in  regard  to  his 
creation, and wondrous, comprehensive organs and faculties created so as to perform 
thousands  of  amazing  duties,  is  a  man,  the  microcosm,  inferior  to the  universe.  This 
means that the One Who creates the particle cannot lack the power to create the star. 
And the One Who creates an organ like the tongue, certainly easily creates man. And 
the One Who creates a single man thus perfectly surely can create all animals, and this 
He  does  before  our  eyes.  And  the  One  Who  creates  a  seed  as  a  list,  an  index,  a 
notebook  of  the  laws  issuing  from  the  Divine  command,  and  as  a  “knot  of  life,”  is 
certainly  the  Creator  of  all trees. And the One Who creates man as a sort of seed of 
the  world  and  as  its  comprehensive  fruit,  and  makes him the mirror to all the Divine 
Names, and connected to all the universe, and vicegerent of the earth, most certainly 
possesses  such  power  that  He  creates  the  universe  as  easily  as  He  creates man,  and 
sets  it  in  order.  In  which  case,  whoever  is  the  Creator,  Maker,  and  Sustainer  of the 
particle,  part,  particular  individual,  seed,  and  man  must  be  the  Creator,  Maker,  and 
Sustainer  of  the  stars,  species,  the  whole,  universals,  trees,  and  the  whole  universe. 
That it should be otherwise is impossible and precluded. 

Eighth Step 

Through  the  mystery  of  the  surroundings  and  wholes  inevitably  being  in  the 
grasp  of  the  Creator  of  the  things  which  are surrounded and the parts, like  the 
miniature  inscribed  beings  similar  to  them,  or  ‘milked,’  extracted  droplets,  for 
they and their likes are included in the former with the balance of His knowledge, 
or are ‘milked’ from them in accordance with the principles of His wisdom. 
That  is,  the  relation  to  the  large  universals  which  encompass  them  of  the 
particulars  which  are  encompassed,  and  of  individuals,  seeds,  and  grains  which  are 
within universals and wholes, is as tiny miniatures, and as the identical samples of the 
universal and wholes, inscribed in miniature in the very finest writing. Since this is so, 
the encompassing universal must be within the grasp of the Creator of the particulars 
and completely under His disposal so that through the balances of His knowledge  

 

632

and  its  fine  pens  He  can  include  that  huge  all-encompassing  book  in  hundreds  of 
miniscule  sections  and  notebooks.  The  relation  and  comparison,  then,  of  the 
encompassed parts and particulars with their surroundings is as droplets ‘milked’ from 
what  encompasses  them,  like  milk,  or  as  if  someone  squeezed  the  surroundings  and 
those  points  dripped from them. For example, a melon seed is a droplet milked from 
all  its  surroundings  or  a  point  in  which  is  written  the  whole  book,  for  it  contains  its 
index,  list,  and  programme.  Since  it is  thus,  the  encompassing  wholes  and  universals 
must be within the hand of the Maker of those particulars, droplets, and points so that 
He  can  milk  the  individuals,  droplets,  and  points  from  them  with  the  sensitive 
principles of His wisdom. This means that the One Who creates the seed and individual 
must the One Who creates the whole and the universals, and the other universals and 
sorts,  which  encompass  the  latter  and  are  bigger  than  them;  it  could  not  be  anyone 
else. In which case, the One Who creates a single soul can only be He Who creates all 
mankind. And the One Who raises to life one dead person, can raise to life all jinn and 
men at the resurrection of the dead, and will raise them to life. So see, what is claimed 
and stated by the verse,  

Your creation and your resurrection is but as a single soul49  

is most definitely and brilliantly pure truth and reality. 

Ninth Step 

And through the mystery of a Qur’an of Dignity inscribed with particles of ether 
on an atom or minutest particle not being of less eloquence or wondrous art than 
a  Qur’an  of  Grandeur written with the ink of the  stars and suns on the page of 
the  heavens;  similarly,  through  their  relation  to  the  power  of  the  universe’s 
Creator,  the  blooming  rose  not  being  of  less  eloquence  and  art  than  the  star 
Venus; nor the ant being inferior to the elephant, nor the microbe inferior to the 
rhinoceros,  nor  the  bee  inferior  to  the  date-palm.  Moreover,  the  extreme  ease 
and  speed in the creation of things causes the people of misguidance to confuse 
formation  with  self-formation,  which  necessitates  innumerable  impossibilities 
and is a delusion; while it proves to the people of guidance that in relation to the 
power of the universe’s Creator particles and the stars are equal, May His glory 
be exalted, for there is no god but He; God is Most Great! 

[I wanted  to explain the meaning of this last step at length, but regretably I 
have  been  prevented  by  my  extreme  distress,  arising  from  arbitrary 
oppression and harassment, and my weakness and serious  

                                             

49 Qur’an, 31:28. 

 

633

sicknesses, resulting from poisoning. I have therefore have been compelled to 
suffice with a brief indication.] 

That is, if a Qur’an of Mighty Stature was written on a particle which is supposed 
to  be  indivisible  and  called  in  the  science  of  theology  (kalam)  and  in  philosophy 
“jawhar-i fard,” in particles of ether, which is matter even finer, and if another mighty 
Qur’an was written in stars and suns on the pages of the heavens, then the two were 
compared, the microscopic Qur’an written in particles would not be inferior in respect 
of  marvels  and  miraculous  art  than  the  vast  Qur’an  gilding  the  face  of  the  heavens; 
indeed, in some ways it would be superior. 

In exactly the same way, from the point of view of the originality and eloquence in 
their creation, in relation to the power of the universe’s Creator, the rose is not inferior 
to  the  star  Venus,  the  ant  is  not  inferior  to  the  elephant,  and  a  microbe  is  more 
wondrous  as  regards  its  creation  than  a  rhinoceros,  and  with  its  marvellous  inborn 
faculties the bee is superior to the date-palm. This means that the One Who creates the 
bee can create all animals. The One Who raises a single soul to life can raise to life all 
men at the resurrection of the dead and gather them together in the arena of the Great 
Gathering, and will gather them together. Nothing at all is difficult for Him, for before 
our eyes every spring He creates a hundred thousand samples of the resurrection with 
the greatest ease and speed. 

Very briefly, the meaning of the final Arabic sentence is this: since the people of 
misguidance  do  not  know  the  unshakeable  truths  of  the  above  ‘Steps,’  and  since 
creatures  come  into  existence  extremely  easily  and  extremely  quickly,  they  imagine 
their formation and creation through a Maker’s infinite power to be self-formation and 
that they come into existence of themselves. They have thus opened for themselves the 
door of in every way impossible and precluded superstitions, which no mind, and not 
even  delusion,  could  accept.  For  example,  in  that  case, every single particle of every 
animate creature would have to be ascribed an infinite power, knowledge, and eye that 
sees  everything,  and  power  sufficient  to  execute  every  art  and  skill.  Thus,  by  not 
accepting a single God, they are bound by their ways to accept gods to the number of 
particles, and thus deserve to enter among the lowest of the low of Hell. 

As  for  the  people  of  guidance,  the  powerful  truths  and  irrefutable  proofs  of  the 
above  ‘Steps’  afford  to  their  sound  hearts  and  straight  minds  the  firmest  conviction 
and most powerful belief and assent at the level of ‘the vision of certainty,’ so that they 
believe  without  doubt  or  misgiving  and with peace of mind that in relation to Divine 
power  there  is  no  difference  between  stars  and  particles,  or  the  smallest  and  the 
largest, for all  

 

634

these  wondrous things occur before our very eyes. And every marvel of art confirms 
the assertion of the verse, 

Your creation and your resurrection is but as a single soul,  

and  testifies  that  what  it  states  is  pure  truth  and  reality,  and  through  the  tongues  of 
their beings they declare: “God is Most Great!” We too declare: “God is Most Great!” 
to their number. And with all our strength and conviction we affirm the verse’s claim, 
and we testify with innumerable proofs that what it states is pure truth and reality. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.50 

O God! Grant blessings and peace to the one whom You sent as a Mercy to 
all the worlds, and all praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds. 

  

                                             

50 Qur’an, 2:32. 

 

635

[A Eulogy  which  answers the questions: What is the Risale-i Nur? What is 
its true nature, and what is the true nature of its Interpreter?] 

The high servants of religion who are described in Hadiths as coming at the start 
of  every  century  are  not  innovators,  they  are  followers.  That  is  to  say,  they  do  not 
create anything new themselves, they do not bring any new ordinances; they adjust and 
strengthen religion by way of following to the letter the fundamentals and ordinances 
of religion and the Sunna of the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH); they proclaim the true 
and  original  meaning  of  religion;  they  remove  and  render  null  and  void  the  baseless 
matters which have been mixed up with it; they reject and destroy the attacks made on 
religion;  they  establish  the  Divine  commands,  and  proclaim  and  make  known  the 
nobility  and  exaltedness  of  the  Divine  ordinances.  Only,  without  spoiling  the  basic 
position  or  damaging  the  original  spirit,  they  carry  out  their  duties  through  new 
methods  of  persuasion appropriate to the understanding of the age, and in new ways 
and with new details. 

These dominical officials confirm their positions through their actions and deeds. 
They  carry  out  their  duty  of  reflecting  the  firmness  of  their  belief and their sincerity. 
They  display  in  their  actions  their  degree  of faith. They show that they follow to the 
letter the practices of Muhammad (PBUH) and that truly they have been invested with 
the  Prophetic  robe.  In  short:  for  the  community  of  Muhammad  (PBUH)  they  form 
perfect  models  in  respect  of  deeds  and  morality  and  following  and  adhering  to  the 
Prophet’s  Sunna;  they  are examples worthy of being followed. The works  they write 
expounding  God’s  Book  and  elucidating  the  injunctions  of  religion,  and  their 
presenting  these  in  accordance  with  the  understanding  of  the  age  and  its  degree  of 
learning,  are  not  the  products  of  their  own  elevated,  fertile  minds;  they  are  not  the 
result  of their own intelligence and knowledge. They are directly the inspirations and 
promptings  of  the  Pure  Essence  of  Messengership  (PBUH),  who  is  the  source  of 
revelation.  Jaljalutiyya,  Mathnawi-i  Sharif,  and  Futuh al-Ghayb and such works are 
all of this sort. Those holy persons have a part in the ordering of those choice works, 
and in their manner of exposition; that is, they are the places where their meanings are 
manifested and reflected. 

To  come  to  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  its  Interpreter:  since  in  this  lofty  work  are  an 
elevated  effulgence  and  endless  perfection  never  before  encountered  in  any  similar 
work; and since it is observed that, in a way hitherto unseen in any work, it is the heir 
to the effulgences of the Qur’an, which  

 

636

is a Divine lamp and the sun of guidance and moon of happiness; it is a fact as clear as 
the sun that its basis is the pure light of the Qur’an and that it bears the effulgence of 
the lights of Muhammad (PBUH) to a greater extent than the works of the saints, and 
that the share in it, and concern with it, and sacred disposal over it of the Pure Essence 
of  Messengership  (PBUH)  are  greater  than  in  the  works  of  the  saints,  and  the 
attainment and perfections of the one who is its Interpreter and place of manifestation 
is elevated and matchless to the same degree. 

Yes,  while  still  in  his  childhood  and  never  having  studied,  in  the  space  of  three 
month’s study in order to be saved from externals, the Risale-i Nur’s Interpreter was 
made heir to the early and later sciences, mystic knowledge, the realities of things, the 
mysteries  of  the  universe,  and  Divine  wisdom,  which  had  been  bestowed  on  no  one 
previously.  With  his  learning  and  moral  fortitude,  consisting  of  his  being  embodied 
chastity, and his extraordinary courage and complete self-sufficiency, he was a miracle 
of creation, an embodiment of Divine favour; his abilities were God-given. 

As a matchless scholar, an extraordinary prodigy, challenging the whole world of 
learning before reaching the age of puberty, he silenced all the scholars with whom he 
debated,  answered  absolutely  correctly  and  without  hesitation  just  about  all  the 
questions  posed  to  him,  bore  the  mantle  of  ‘master’  from  the  age  of  fourteen,  and 
continuously  irradiated  the  effulgence  of  knowledge  and  light  of  wisdom.  With  the 
subtlety  and  profundity  of  his  exposition,  the  conciseness  and  loftiness  of  his 
explanations,  and  his  insight,  perspicacity  and  light  of  wisdom,  he  astonished  the 
scholars and learned, deservedly earning the illustrious title of ‘Bediuzzaman’ (Wonder 
of  the  Age).  As  someone  who  with  his  elevated  qualities  and  scholarly  virtues 
propagated  and  proved most perfectly the  religion of Muhammad (PBUH), he surely 
received the highest favours of the Lord of the Prophets (PBUH), and was under his 
lofty protection and auspices. Doubtless he was one of noble virtue who advanced at 
the decree of the Most Holy Prophet (PBUH), and acted under his command, and was 
the heir to his truths and reflected his lights. 

As indicated by his making the lights and knowledge of Muhammad (PBUH) and 
radiance  of  the  Divine  Candle  (Qur’an)  shine  most  brilliantly,  and  the  mathematical 
significances  of  the  Qur’an  and  Hadith  being  fulfilled  in  him,  and  the  mathematical 
expositions  of  verses  expressing  the  prophetic  utterances  concentrating  on  himself, 
there  is  no  doubt  that  he  was  a  burnished  mirror  to  the  Divine  Messengership  in 
serving the cause of belief, and the final luminous fruit of the tree of  

 

637

Messengership, and the final mouth of reality in respect of the legacy of the tongue of 
Messengership,  and  a  final  happy  bearer  of  ‘the  Divine  Candle’  in respect  of serving 
belief. 

Signed in the name of the Risale-i Nur students who attended the single ‘lesson’ 

of the third School of Joseph, consisting of The Shining Proof and Zühretü’n-Nur, 

Ahmed Feyzi, Ahmed Nazif, Salâhaddin, Zübeyir, Ceylan, Sungur, Tabancali  

They have accorded me a share far exceeding my due. But lacking the courage to 
offend these signatories, I remained silent, and accepted their eulogy in the name of the 
collective personality of the Risale-i Nur students. 

                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise. 

Peace be upon you and God’s mercy and blessings, for ever and ever! 
Our Most Beloved, Blessed, Highly-Valued, Kindly Master! 
Our  revered  Master,  who  has  completely  abandoned  his  own  will  and  left  all 
matters  to  dominical  will,  who  sees  the  mercy  and  wisdom  of Divine Determining in 
every apparent calamity and hardship, and with perfect trust and submission awaits in 
perfect  patience  the  results  of  that  dominical  manifestation!  In  this  terrible  century 
when in some places the things on which the believers rely have begun to crumble, and 
with  publications  opposing  the  pillars  of  belief  the  deniers  of  God  flaunt  themselves 
openly  and  arrogantly,  and  to  act  in  opposition  to  the  Qur’an’s  commands  and  not 
believe  in  spiritual  forces,  and  to  ascribe  the  right  of  creation  to  unconscious,  blind, 
deaf nature are considered marks of civilization and of being ‘cultured’ and intellectual 
—at such a time, our gracious Master wrote the Risale-i Nur, a miracle of the Qur’an, 
and offering its soothing cures to agitated, wretched hearts needy for the water of life 
of  belief,  gave  them  the  good  news  of  eternal  happiness.  On  its  highway  of  reality 
which  proves  its  teachings  with  decisive,  categorical  arguments  and  proofs,  and 
through  the  mystery  of  our  Illustrious  Leader (PBUH), to whom refers “the cause is 
like  the  doer,”  the  equivalent  of  all  the  good  deeds  performed  by  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  Risale-i  Nur  students  who  have  saved  their  belief  through  the  Risale-i 
Nur has passed to the register of his good deeds! 

Just as in Denizli Prison Almighty God bestowed The Fruits of Belief,  

 

638

whose  remedies  were  sufficiently  efficacious  to  reduce  to  nothing  the  distress  of  the 
incarceration,  and  that  rose’s  sweet  scent  eliminated  all  the  pains  of  its  thorns, 
dispelling  all  our  temporary  distress;  so  too  here  in  Afyon  Prison,  the  physical 
discomforts of one day of which are equal to a month’s discomfort in Denizli Prison, 
the Most  Munificent and Compassionate One of Beauty  has bestowed at the hand of 
you  our  beloved  Master  sublime  proofs  affirming  Divine  unity  and  praise,  and  the 
messengership of Muhammad (PBUH), which are cures and antidotes. We most faulty 
students of yours, who through the effulgences of the Risale-i Nur have learnt to read 
and  write,  consider  these  three  short  treatises  to  be  both  conclusive  proofs  of  the 
Risale-i  Nur’s  veracity  and  a  sort  of  summary  of  it,  in  the  same  way  that  the 
programme and index of a mighty pine-tree is encapsulated in its seed. 

We are incapable of describing the virtues of these three treatises, but on reading 
them  our  spirits  experience  a  powerful  relief,  our  physical sufferings are transformed 
into joy, and they bring us innumerable fruits from the garden of belief. With its eleven 
proofs  of  Divine  unity,  the  first  of  them  dispels  the  darknesses  of  disbelief, 
misguidance, and nature at this time. The second expounds with sacred proofs of belief 
Sura al-Fatiha, the source, basis, and master of all the comparisons in the Risale-i Nur. 
And  the  third  explains  brilliantly  in  a  way  that  ensures  complete  certitude  the  part 
about  the  messengership  of  Muhammad  (PBUH),  which  was  imparted  to  you,  our 
beloved Master, here in Afyon Prison. 

Although we are in no way worthy of anything, we shall strive with all our power 
to publish these works, which we have received. Offering endless thanks to Almighty 
God,  we  pray  to  Him  saying:  “Most  Merciful  of  the  Merciful!  May  You  be  pleased 
with our Master for ever and ever!” 

                                                        The Enduring One, He is the Enduring One! 
                                                          In the name of the Risale-i Nur students, 

                                                               Zübeyir, Ceylan, Sungur, Ibrahim 

 

639

Introduction to the Turkish Translation of the Original Arabic  
‘Damascus Sermon’ 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise 

Peace be upon you and God’s mercy and blessings for ever and ever! 
My Dear, Loyal Brothers! 

[With  a  presentiment  of  the  future,  the  Old  Said  perceived  the  truths 
expressed  in  this  Arabic  sermon,  which,  on  the  insistence  of the Damascus 
religious authorities, he delivered forty years ago in the Umayyad Mosque to 
a congregation of close on ten thousand, which included a hundred religious 
scholars; he gave news of those truths with complete certainty as though they 
were going to be realized shortly. However, the two World Wars and twenty-
five  years of absolute despotism delayed their realization; it is now that the 
signs  of  this,  which  were  predicted  then,  are  beginning  to  be  seen  in  the 
World  of  Islam.  Therefore, if you consider it appropriate,  you may  publish 
the  translation  of  this  most  important  and  instructive  piece,  not  as  an  old, 
outdated  sermon,  but  as  fresh,  pertinent  instruction  on  social  and  Islamic 
questions  addressing  directly,  in  1371  instead  of  1327,  the  congregation  of 
three hundred and seventy (now more than a  million) million in the mosque 
of the Islamic world, rather than in the Umayyad Mosque.]  

It is fitting here to write the most important answer to a most important question. 
For  the  Old  Said  spoke  prophetically  in  that  lesson  of  forty  years  ago  as  though  he 
were  seeing  the  wondrous  teachings  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  its  effects.  It  is  for  this 
reason that I am writing that question and answer here. It is like this: 

Many  have  asked  both  me  and  the  Risale-i  Nur  students:  “Why  is  it  that  the 
Risale-i Nur is not defeated in the face of so much opposition and so many obdurate 
philosophers and people of misguidance? By preventing to an extent the dissemination 
of  numerous  valuable,  true  books on belief and Islam, and by means of their worldly 
pleasures and vices, they have deprived many youths and others of the truths of belief. 
But  their  most  violent  attacks,  vicious  treatment,  lies  and  propaganda  have  been 
directed at the Risale-i Nur, to destroy it and to scare people away from it and make 
them  give it up. Despite this, the Risale-i Nur has spread in a  way never seen in any 
other work, six hundred thousand copies of its  

 

640

treatises being written out by hand with unflagging zeal and published secretly. How is 
it  that  it  causes  itself  to  be  read  with  such  enthusiasm,  both  within  the  country  and 
abroad? What is the reason for it? In reply to the many questions of this sort, we say: 

Being  a  true  commentary  on  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  through  the  mystery  of  its 
miraculousness, the Risale-i Nur demonstrates that in misguidance is a sort of Hell in 
this world, while in belief is a sort of Paradise. It points out the grievous pains in sins, 
bad deeds, and forbidden pleasures, and proves that in good deeds and virtues and the 
truths  of  the  Shari‘a  are  to  be  found  pleasures  like  the  pleasures  of  Paradise.  In  this 
way it saves the sensible among those who have fallen into vice and misguidance. For 
at this time there are two awesome conditions: 

T h e   F i r s t :  Since man’s emotions, which are blind to the consequences of 
things  and  prefer  an  ounce  of  present  pleasure  to  tons  of  future  joys,  have  come  to 
prevail over mind and reason, the only way to save the dissipated from their vice is to 
show  them  the  pain  present  in  their  pleasure  and  to  defeat  their  emotions.  Although 
they  are  aware  of  the  diamond-like  bounties  and  pleasures  of  the  hereafter,  as  the 
verse,  

They deem lovable the life of this world51  

indicates,  while  being  believers, the people of misguidance choose worldly pleasures, 
which are like pieces of glass soon to be shattered. The only way of saving them from 
this love of the world and from the danger of succumbing to it is by showing them the 
hellish torments and pains they suffer even in this world. This is the way the Risale-i 
Nur takes. For at this time, due to the obduracy arising from absolute unbelief and the 
intoxication caused by the vice and misguidance arising from science, perhaps only one 
in ten or even twenty can be induced to give up his evil ways by proving the existence 
of  Hell  and  its  torments,  after  having  told  him  of  Almighty  God.  Having  heard  this, 
such people are likely to say: “God is Forgiving and Compassionate, and Hell is a long 
way  off,”  and  continue  in  their  dissipation.  Their  hearts  and  spirits  are  overcome  by 
their emotions.  

Thus,  by  showing  through  most  of  its  comparisons  the  grievous  and  terrible 
results  in  this  world  of  disbelief  and  misguidance,  the  Risale-i  Nur  makes  even  the 
most stubborn and  arrogant people feel disgust at those inauspicious, illicit pleasures, 
leading  them  to  repent.  The  short  comparisons  in  the  Sixth,  Seventh,  and  Eighth 
Words, and the long one in the Third Stopping-Place in the Thirty-Second Word lead 
a person to feel repugnance at the vice and misguidance of the way he has taken, and  

                                             

51 Qur’an, 14:3. 

 

641

cause  him  to  accept  what  they  teach.  As  an  example,  I  shall  recount  briefly  the 
situations  I  beheld on a journey of the imagination, which were in fact reality. Those 
wishing  for  a  more  detailed  account  may  look  at  the  end  of  Sikke-i  Tasdik-i  Gaybi 
(The Ratifying Stamp of the Unseen Collection). 

When on that journey of the imagination I looked at the animal kingdom through 
the eyes of materialist philosophy and the people of misguidance and heedlessness, the 
innumerable  needs  of  animals  and  their  terrible  hunger  together  with  their  weakness 
and impotence appeared to me as most piteous and grievous. I cried out. Then I saw 
through  the  telescope  of  Qur’anic  wisdom  and  belief  that  the  Divine  Name  of  All-
Merciful had risen in the sign of Provider like a shining sun; it gilded with the light of 
its mercy that hungry, wretched animal world.  

Then I saw within the animal world another grievous world which was swathed in 
darkness and would make anyone feel pity and in which young were struggling in their 
need and  powerlessness.  I  was  sorry  I  had  looked  through  the  eyes  of  the people of 
misguidance.  Suddenly,  belief  gave  me  other  spectacles  and  I  saw  the  Name  of  All-
Compassionate rise in the sign of clemency; it transformed and lit up that pitiful world 
in joyous and beautiful fashion, changing my tears of complaint and sorrow into tears 
of joy and thanks.  

Then  the  world  of  humanity  appeared  to  me  as  though  on  a  cinema  screen.  I 
looked through the telescope of the people of misguidance and saw that world to be so 
dark  and  terrifying  that  I  cried  out  from  the  depths of my heart. “Alas!” I cried. For 
they  had  desires  and  hopes  that  stretched  to  eternity,  thoughts  and  imaginings  that 
embraced  the  universe,  the  earnest  desire  for  everlasting  happiness  and  Paradise,  an 
innate capacity and powers on which no limit had been placed and which were free, yet 
despite their innumerable needs and their weakness and impotence they were exposed 
to the attacks of innumerable enemies and the blows of innumerable calamities. Under 
the  perpetual  threat  of  death,  they  lived  out  their  brief  and  tumultuous  lives  in 
wretched  circumstances.  Ever  looking  to  the  grave,  which  for  the  misguided  is  the 
door  to  everlasting  darkness,  they  suffered  the  continuous  blows  of  death  and 
separation, the most painful state for the heart and conscience. I saw that singly and in 
groups they were being thrown into that black well.  

On seeing the world of humanity in this darkness I was about to cry out with my 
heart, spirit, and mind, and all my subtle inner faculties, indeed all the particles of my 
being, when the light and power of belief proceeding from the Qur’an smashed those 
spectacles of misguidance, giving me insight. I saw the Divine Name of All-Just rising 
like the sun in  

 

642

the  sign  of  All-Wise,  the  Name  of  All-Merciful  rising  in  the  sign  of  Munificent,  the 
Name  of  All-Compassionate  rising  in  the  sign  of,  that  is,  in  the  meaning  of,  All-
Forgiving,  the  Name  of  Resurrector  rising  in  the  sign  of  Inheritor,  the  Name  of 
Granter of Life rising in the sign of Bountiful, and the Name of Sustainer rising in the 
sign  of  Owner.  They  lit  up  the  entire world of humanity and all the worlds within it. 
They  dispelled  those  hellish  states,  opened  up  windows  onto  the  luminous  worlds of 
the hereafter, and scattered lights over the world of humanity. I declared: “Praise and 
thanks be to God to the number of particles in existence!” I understood with complete 
certainty that in belief is a sort of paradise in this world too and in misguidance, a sort 
of hell. 

Then  the  world  of  the  earth  appeared.  On  that  journey  of  the  imagination,  the 
dark,  hypothetical  rules  of  the  philosophy  which  does  not  obey  religion  depicted  a 
ghastly world. Voyaging through space on the ship of the aged earth —which travels 
seventy times faster than a cannon-ball a distance of twenty-five thousand years in one 
year,  ever  disposed  to  break  up,  its  interior  in  a  state  of  upheaval— the  situation  of 
wretched  human  kind  appeared  to  me  in  a  desolate  darkness.  My  eyes  darkened.  I 
flung the spectacles of philosophy to the ground, smashing them. Then I looked with a 
view  illumined  with  the  wisdom  of  the  Qur’an  and  belief,  and  I  saw  the  Names  of 
Creator  of  the  Heavens  and  Earth,  All-Powerful,  All-Knowing,  Sustainer,  Allah, 
Sustainer  of  the  Heavens  and  Earth,  Subjugator  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  had  risen  like 
suns in the signs of mercy, grandeur, and dominicality. They lit up that dark, desolate, 
and terrifying world so that the globe appeared to my eye of belief as a well-ordered, 
subjugated,  pleasant,  and  safe  ship,  or  aeroplane,  or  train.  It  contained  everyone’s 
provisions, and had been decked out for trade and enjoyment and to carry beings with 
spirits  through  the  dominical  realms  around  the  sun.    I  exclaimed:  “All  praise  be  to 
God to the number of particles of the earth for the bounty of belief.” 

This has been proved with many comparisons in the Risale-i Nur, that those who 
follow  vice and misguidance suffer a hellish torment in this world too, while through 
the  manifestations  of  belief,  the  believers  and  righteous  may  taste  through  the 
stomachs of Islam and humanity the pleasures of Paradise. They may benefit according 
to the degree of their belief. But in these stormy times, currents which numb the senses 
and  scatter  man’s  attention  on  peripheral  matters,  plunging  him  into  them,  have 
deadened his senses and bewildered him. As a result of this the people of misguidance 
are  temporarily  unable  to  feel  their  torment,  while  the  people  of  guidance  are 
overwhelmed by heedlessness and cannot truly appreciate its pleasures. 

 

643

The Second Awesome Condition This Age: In former times, compared with the 
present there was very little absolute disbelief, or misguidance arising from science, or 
the disbelief arising from perverse obstinacy. The instruction of the Islamic scholars of 
those  times  and  their  arguments  were  therefore  sufficient,  quickly  dispelling  any 
unbelief arising from doubts. Belief in God was general, and they could persuade most 
people  to  give  up  their  misguidance  and  wrongdoing  through  teaching  them  about 
God  and  reminding  them  of  Hell-fire.  But  now  there  are  a  hundred  absolute 
disbelievers in one small town instead of perhaps one in a whole country. Those who 
lose their way due to science and learning and obstinately oppose the truths of belief 
have  increased  a  hundredfold  in  relation  to  former  times.  With  pride  like  that  of  the 
Pharaoh  and  their  terrible  misguidance  these  obdurate  deniers  oppose  the  truths  of 
belief. A sacred truth is therefore much needed that will completely destroy the bases 
of  their  disbelief  in  this  world,  like  an  atom  bomb,  and  will  halt their aggression and 
bring some of them to belief. 

All  praise  be  to  Almighty  God  that  with  its  many  comparisons,  as  the  perfect 
remedy  for  the  wounds  of  this  time,  the  Risale-i  Nur  —a  miracle  of  the  Qur’an  of 
Miraculous Exposition proceeding from its effulgence— has routed even the worst of 
those  obdurate  deniers  with  the  diamond  sword  of  the  Qur’an.  Its  proofs  and 
arguments to the number of the atoms of the universe demonstrating Divine unity and 
the truths of belief show that in twenty-five years it has not been defeated in the face 
of  the  severest  attacks,  but  has  itself  prevailed  and  been  victorious.  Yes,  with  its 
comparisons  of  belief  and  unbelief,  and  guidance  and  misguidance,  the  Risale-i  Nur 
proves  those  truths  self-evidently.  If  note  is  taken,  for  example  of  the  proofs  and 
flashes of the Second Station of the Twenty-Second Word, the First Stopping-Place of 
the  Thirty-Second  Word,  the  ‘Windows’  of  the  Thirty-Third  Letter,  and  the  eleven 
proofs of The Staff of Moses (Asa-yi Musa), it will be understood that it is the truths 
of  the  Qur’an  manifested  in  the  Risale-i  Nur  that  will  smash  and  destroy  absolute 
disbelief and perverse misguidance at this time. 

In  the  same  way  that  the  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  which  solve  the  greatest 
mysteries  of  religion  and  the  riddles  of  the  world’s  creation  have  been  collected 
together  in  The  ‘Mysteries’  Collection  (Tilsimlar  Mecmuasi),  the  pieces  which 
describe  the  hell  in  this  world  of  the  people  of  misguidance  and  the  paradise-like 
pleasures  of  the  people  of  guidance  and  show  that  belief  is  like  a  seed  of  Paradise 
while  unbelief  is  a  seed  of  the  Zakkum-tree  of  Hell,  will  be  put  together  in  a  small 
collection, God willing, and published. 

                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i    

 

644

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise. 

My Dear, Loyal, Unshakeable, Constant, Devoted, Faithful Brothers! 
You  know  that  the Ankara  experts’  committee was unable to deny the instances 
of  wonder-working  and  predictions  looking  to  the  Risale-i  Nur;  its  members  only 
wrongly supposed that I had a part in them, and objected saying: “Such things should 
not  have  been  written  in  the  book;  wonder-working  should  not  be  made  public.”  In 
reply to this minor criticism, I said in my defence: 

They  are  not  mine  and  anyway  I  would  not  dare  to  lay  claim  to  such  wonders, 
they  are  rather  distillations  and  flashes  of  the  Qur’an’s  miraculousness,  which  taking 
the form of wonders in the Risale-i Nur, which is a true commentary on it, are a sort 
of Divine bestowal (in order to strengthen the morale of its students). To make public 
Divine bestowal  is thanks  of a sort and permissible, and it is acceptable. Now, for an 
important  reason,  I  shall  elucidate  my  answer  a  little.  I  was  also  asked  why  I  make 
them  public  and  why  I  concentrate  so  much  on  this  point,  and  why  for  the  last  few 
months  I  have  gone  much  further  in  the  subject.  Most  letters  are  related  to  the 
wonder-working. 

T  h  e      A  n  s  w  e  r  :    Although  at  this  time  in  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  service  of 
religious  belief  hundreds  of  thousands  of  ‘repairers’  are  necessary  in  the  face  of  the 
thousands of destructive forces; and although I have  need of hundreds of scribes and 
assistants;  and  although  the  people  and  the  authorities  should  appreciatively  and 
encouragingly help us and get in touch with us rather than avoiding us and not having 
contact  with  us;  and  although  the  believers  are  obliged  to  give  preference  to  the 
service of belief over the occupations of this worldly life and its benefits, since it looks 
to eternal life; taking myself as an example, I say this: 

Because  of  our  opponents  preventing  me  from  having  contact  with  people  and 
having helpers, and from everything; and their destroying the morale of my friends as 
much as they possibly can, and making them look coldly on me and the Risale-i Nur; 
and because of my being burdened with the duties of a thousand people despite being 
an aged, ill, weak, wretched stranger with no one; and because of my being compelled 
to  avoid  having  contact  with  people  and  mixing  with  them  due  to  a  sort  of  physical 
illness  caused  by  being  isolated  and  oppressed;  and  because  of  their  scaring  off  the 
people so effectively and destroying their morale; —because of all these and in the face 
of all those obstacles, I was made to  

 

645

write  things  of  that  sort  in  order  to  muster  spiritual  forces  around  the  Risale-i  Nur, 
and describe the Divine bestowals, which are a means of strengthening the morale of 
the Risale-i Nur students, and to show that on its own the Risale-i Nur is as powerful 
as  an  army  (and  is  in  no  need  of  others).  For  to  sell  myself,  God  forbid,  and  make 
myself liked, and to boast and show off would be to damage the mystery of sincerity, 
which is an important principle of the Risale-i Nur. Just as, God willing, the Risale-i 
Nur  will  both  defend  itself  and  demonstrate  its  true  value,  so  will  it  in  effect  also 
defend us, and be the means of having our faults pardoned.  

Sending thousands of greetings to all my brothers and sisters, and particularly to 
the innocent and venerable elderly, whose prayers are acceptable, and offering prayers 
for all, we congratulate them on the month of Ramadan and request that they pray for 
us. 

                                                                                  Your ill brother,  
                                                                                  S a i d  N u r s i  

* * * 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

This  powerless  brother  of  yours  says  this  both  to  that  old  friend  who  objected, 
and  to  the  attentive,  and  to  yourselves:  through  the  effulgence  of  the  Qur’an  of 
Miraculous  Exposition,  the  New  Said  puts  forward  proofs  of  the  truths  of  belief  so 
logical  and  correct  that  they  compel not only the Muslim scholars, but also the  most 
obdurate  European  philosophers  to  submit,  and  this  they  do.  As  for  the  signs  and 
allusions  of  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition,  from  the  level  of  its  allusive 
meanings, attracting attention to the Risale-i  Nur, which is one of its miracles at this 
time, it is a mark of the Qur’an’s miraculousness —similar to the allusive and symbolic 
prophecies  of  Imam  ‘Ali  (May  God be pleased with him) and Gawth al-A‘zam (May 
God be pleased with him) concerning the Risale-i Nur’s importance and value. To do 
so is also necessitated by the miraculous eloquence of that tongue of the Unseen. 

Yes, it was imparted to me in Eskişehir Prison at a terrible time when we were in 
dire  need  of  a  sacred  solace:  “You  cite  the  saints  of  olden  times  as  testifying  to the 
Risale-i Nur’s acceptability, but in accordance with the inner meaning of the verse, 

Nor anything fresh or dry [green or withered], but is [inscribed] in a Record 
Clear,52 

                                             

52 Qur’an, 6:59. 

 

646

it is the Qur’an that should have the word in this matter. Does it find the Risale-i Nur 
acceptable?  How  does  it  look  on  it?”  I  was  faced  with  this  strange  question.  So  I 
sought  help  from  the  Qur’an,  and  within  the  space  of  an  hour  I  perceived  that  the 
Risale-i Nur was one element of the level of allusive meanings of thirty-three verses, 
from  the  level  constituted  by  details  of  their  explicit  meanings  (and  included  in  the 
generality  of  the  allusive  meanings),  and  that  there  were  powerful  inferences  to  its 
inclusion  and  distinction.  A  part  of  these  I  saw  in  some  detail,  and  a  part  I  saw  in 
summary  form.  In  my  view,  no  doubt,  hesitation,  suspicion,  or  misgiving  remained. 
And I wrote that firm conviction of mine with the intention of strengthening the faith 
of the believers through the Risale-i Nur, and I gave it to my closest (has) brothers on 
condition it was held to  be confidential. In the treatise, we do not say that this is the 
explicit meaning of the verse, lest the hojas say “he has been smitten by the evil-eye.” 
And  we  do  not  say  that  this  is  the  generality  of  the  allusive  meaning.  We  say  that 
underlying  the  explicit  meaning  are  numerous  layers  or  levels,  one  of  which  is  the 
allusive  and  symbolic  meaning,  and  that  the  allusive  meaning  is  a  generality.  Every 
century, this has particularities. And this century the Risale-i Nur is one element in the 
generality  of  that  level  of  its  allusive  meaning.  Inferences  drawn  by  means  of  the 
principles  of  jafr  and  numbers,  practised  since  early  times  by  the  ‘ulama,  indeed, 
proofs,  show  that  that  element  is  intentionally  held  in  view  and  will  perform  an 
important  function,  and  this  does  not  harm  the  verse  of  the  Qur’an  or  its  clear 
meaning,  but  serves  its  miraculousness  and  eloquence.  One  who  cannot  deny  the 
innumerable deductions made by the people of reality from Qur’anic allusions, should 
not deny this, and no one can deny it. 

However,  if  the  person  who  out  of  amazement  deems  it  unlikely  that  such  an 
important work should appear at the hand of an insignificant person like myself thinks 
of the creation of a pine-tree the size of a mountain out of a seed the size of a grain of 
wheat as being a sign of Divine power and grandeur, he is surely bound to say that the 
appearance  of  this  work  at  such  a  time  of  intense  need  from  someone  as  absolutely 
impotent and wanting as myself is evidence for the vast extent of Divine mercy. By the 
honour of the Risale-i Nur, I assure you and those who object, that these allusions and 
symbolic predictions and indications of the saints always drove me to offer thanks and 
praise  and  to  seek  forgiveness  for  my  sins.  I  can  prove  to  you  through  the  glimpses 
you have had of my life, under your very eyes these twenty years, that at no time, not 
even for a minute, did they inflate my ego and make my evil-commanding soul proud 
and arrogant. Nevertheless, man is not free of fault or forgetfulness. I have numerous 
faults of which I am not aware. Also, perhaps my own ideas  

 

647

crept in and there are some errors in some of the treatises. But since they do not object 
to  the  false  and  corrupting  interpretations  of  the  people  of  misguidance, screened by 
setting  up  man-made  translations  in  place  of  the  sacred  letters  of  the  Qur’an,  in  the 
deficient  letters  of  the  new  [Latin]  script,  and  their  harming  the  clear  meanings  of 
verses, they surely should not object to someone wretched and persecuted expounding 
a  fine  point  of  the  Qur’an’s  miraculousness  in  order  to  strengthen  the  belief  of  his 
brothers,  to  the  extent  of  discouraging  him  in  his  service  of  belief,  as  not  only  the 
people of reality, anyone with even a grain of fairness would agree. 

In  addition  I  say this:  in  the  face  of  the  awesome  attacks  of  misguidance  at  this 
time,  the  powerful,  true  ways,  paths,  and  tariqats  with millions of devoted  followers 
have been apparently defeated.  But a semi-literate person under constant surveillance 
living  opposite  the  police-station,  who  is  alone  and  the  object  of  a  many-sided 
campaign of slander in order to make everyone execrate him, cannot lay claim to the 
Risale-i  Nur,  which  is  more  advanced  than  those  other  ways  and  has  resisted  the 
attacks more strongly, and that work cannot be the product of his skill, and he cannot 
take  pride  in  it. It has rather been bestowed directly by Divine mercy as a miracle of 
the All-Wise Qur’an at this time. He laid hands on that gift of the Qur’an together with 
thousands of his friends. For sure the duty of chief interpreter fell to him, but evidence 
that it is not the work of his thought, knowledge, and intelligence is that in the Risale-i 
Nur are parts  which were written in six hours, others that were written in two hours, 
others in one hour, and some in ten minutes even. I swear that even with the power of 
memory  of  the  Old  Said  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him)53  with  my  own  thought  I 
could not write in ten hours what was written in ten minutes. With my own mind and 
capacity  I  could  not  write  in  two  days  the  treatise  that  was  written  in  an  hour.  And 
neither myself nor the most exacting religious philosopher could research the matters 
of the Thirtieth Word and write it in six days, although it was written in one day in six 
hours. And so on. 

That  is  to  say,  despite  being  bankrupt,  I  am  the  herald  and  servant  of  a 
wonderfully rich jeweller’s shop. Out of His grace and munificence may Almighty God 
make us and all Risale-i Nur students purely and sincerely constant in this service, and 
give us success. Amen. In veneration of the Lord of Messengers. 

                                                                            S a i d  N u r s i 

                                             

53 Intending it to be a prayer, some of the scribes wrote the phrase (May God be pleased with 
him) after this wretched Said’s name. I wanted to change it, but it occurred to me that since it is a 
prayer seeking God’s pleasure, it should not be interfered with, so I did not change it. 

648

The Second Chapter 
of the Twenty-Ninth Flash 
(On the phrase: All praise be to God!) 

[This  short  treatise,  called  the  Second  Chapter,  explains  only  nine  of  the
countless  lights  and  advantages  of  belief  in  God,  which  make  man declare: 
“All praise be to God!”] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 

FIRST POINT  

First of all, two things will be pointed out: 
1.    Philosophy  is  a  pair  of  dark  glasses  which  shows  everything  to  be  ugly  and
frightful. While belief in God is a transparent, clear, luminous pair of spectacles which
shows everything to be beautiful and familiar. 

2.    Man  is  connected  with  all  creatures,  has  a  sort  of  commerce  with  all things,
and  by  nature  is  compelled  to  meet,  talk,  and  be  neighbourly  with  the  things  that
blockade  him;  so  too  he  possesses  six  aspects:  a  left,  right,  upper,  lower,  front,  and
back aspect. 

On wearing either of these two pairs of spectacles, man can see the creatures and

things present in the aspects mentioned above. 

Right  Aspect:  What  is  meant  by  this  aspect  is  the  past.  When  it  is  looked  at
through  the  spectacles  of  philosophy,  what  is  seen  is  a  vast,  dark,  terrifying,
overturned  graveyard, where the doomsday of the land of the past has come to pass.
There can be no doubt that this sight casts man into great terror, fear, and despair. 

649

However, when this aspect is looked at through the spectacles of belief, even if the land
appears to have been turned upside down, as indeed it has, there has been no loss of life; it is
understood that its crew and inhabitants have been transferred to a better world, one full of
light. The graves and pits are seen to be underground tunnels, dug to lead to another, light-
filled world. That is to say, the joy, relief, confidence, and peace of mind belief gives to man
is a Divine bounty which makes him repeat thousands of times over: “All praise be to God!”  
Left Aspect: When the future is looked at through the spectacles of philosophy, it
appears  in  the  form  of  a  huge,  black,  terrifying  grave  which  is  going  to  rot  us  and
make us prey to snakes and scorpions which will eliminate us. But when it is looked
at through the spectacles of belief, it is seen in the form of a repast comprising every
variety  of  the  finest  and  most  delicious  foods  and  drinks  which  Almighty  God,  the
Most  Merciful  and  All-Compassionate  Creator,  has  prepared  for  man.  So  it  makes
him repeat many thousands of times: “All praise be to God!” 

Upper  Aspect:  This  is  the  heavens.  When  a  person  looks  at  this  aspect  through
the spectacles of philosophy, he feels an awful terror at the great speed and variety of
the motions —like horse races or military manoeuvres— of the millions of stars and
heavenly bodies in endless space. Whereas when a believer looks at them, he sees that
just as those strange and wonderful manoeuvres are being carried out under the super-
vision of a commander and at his command, so the stars are adorning the world of the
heavens and are light-giving lamps for him. As a result he feels not fear and fright at those
horses racing, but familiarity and affection. It is surely little to say: “All praise be to God!”
thousands of times for the bounty of belief which thus illuminates the world of the heavens. 
Lower Aspect: This is the earth. When man looks at this world with the eye of
philosophy, he sees it as an untethered, unhaltered animal wandering aimlessly around
the sun, or like a holed and captainless boat, and he is carried away by fear and anxiety. But
when he looks with belief, he sees it in the form of a ship of the Most Merciful One
ploughing its course around the sun under the command of God Almighty, with all its
food, drink, and clothing on board, for the pleasure of mankind. So he starts to declare
with great feeling: “All praise be to God!” for this great bounty which springs from belief. 
Front Aspect: If a person who indulges in philosophy looks at this aspect, he sees
that all living creatures, whether human or animal, are disappearing group by group
and  with  great  speed  towards  it.  That  is  to  say,  they  are  going  to  non-being  and
ceasing to exist. Since he knows that he  

650

too is a traveller on that road, he goes out of his mind with grief. But for a believer
looking  with  the  eye  of  belief,  men  journeying  to  that  aspect  are  not  passing  to  the
world  of  non-existence,  they  are  being  transferred  from  one  pasture  to  another  like
nomads, and migrating from a transitory realm to an everlasting one, and from a farm
of service and labour to the wages office, and from a country of hardship and difficulty
to one of plenty and ease. The believer meets this aspect with pleasure and gratitude. 
Difficulties  which  occur  on  the  road  like  death  and  the  grave  are  sources  of
happiness by reason of their results. For the road which leads to the luminous worlds
passes  through  the  grave,  and  the  greatest  happiness  is  the  result  of  the  worst,  most
grievous disasters. For example, Joseph (PUH) attained the happiness of being ruler
of  Egypt  only  by  way  of  being  thrown  into  the  well  by  his  brothers  and  cast  into
prison  at  the  slanders  of  Zulaikha.  In  the  same  way,  a  child  coming  into  the  world
from  his  mother’s  womb  only  reaches  the  happiness  of  this  world  as  a  result  of  the
excruciating, crushing difficulties he experiences on the way. 

Back  Aspect:  That  is,  since  one  who  looks  at  those  who  have  remained  behind
with  the  view  of  philosophy  can  find  no  answer  to  the  question:  “Where  have  they
come  from  and  where  are  they  going,  and  why  did  they  come  to  the  land  of  this
world?”, he naturally remains in a torment of bewilderment and doubt. But were he to
look  through  the  spectacles  of  belief,  he  would  understand  that  men  are  observers,
sent by the Pre-Eternal Sovereign to contemplate and study the wonderful miracles of
power displayed in the exhibition of the universe, and that after receiving their marks
and ranks in conformity with the degree they have grasped the value and grandeur of
those miracles of power and the degree to which the miracles point to the grandeur of
the Pre-Eternal Sovereign, men will return to the Sovereign’s realm. So he will say:
“All praise be to God!” for the bounty of belief which has given him this bounty. 

Since the praise offered in saying: “All praise be to God!” for the bounty of belief,
which thus banishes the above-mentioned layers of darkness, is also a bounty, praise
should be offered for it too. And praise should be offered a third time for this second
bounty of praise, and a fourth time for the third bounty of praise... That is to say, an in-
finite chain of praise is born of a single uttering of the phrase: “All praise be to God!” 

SECOND POINT  

One  should  say:  “All  praise  be  to  God!”  for  the  bounty  of  belief  which
illuminates  these  six  aspects,  for  just  as  since  it  disperses  the  darkness  of  the  six
aspects, it may be considered a great bounty for the warding off of evil, so too since it
illuminates them it may be thought of as a  

651

second  bounty,  for  the  attraction  of  benefits.  Therefore,  since  man  is  by  nature
civilized,  he  is  connected  with  all  the  creatures  in  the  six  aspects,  and  through  the
bounty of belief has the possibility of benefiting from the six aspects. 

Thus, according to a meaning of the verse: 

Wheresoever you turn, there is the countenance of God,1 

man finds enlightenment in whichever of the six aspects he is found. In fact, someone
who is a believer has a life which in effect stretches from the foundation of the world to
its end. This life of his receives assistance from the light of a life which extends from
pre-eternity to post-eternity. In the same way, thanks to the belief which illuminates
the six aspects, man’s narrow time and space are transformed into a broad and easy
world. This extensive world becomes like man’s house, and the past and the future like
present time for his spirit and heart. The distance between between them disappears. 

THIRD POINT  

“All praise be to God!” 

The fact that belief affords sources of support and assistance necessitates saying:

Yes, because of their impotence and their multitudinous enemies, humankind are in
need of a source of support to which they can have recourse to repulse those enemies. Like-
wise, because of the abundance of their needs and their extreme poverty, they need a source
of assistance from which they may seek help, so that through it they may meet their needs. 
O man! Your one and only point of support is belief in God. The only source of
assistance for your spirit and conscience is belief in the hereafter. One who does not
know  of  these  two  sources  suffers  constant  fear  in  his  heart  and  spirit,  and  his
conscience  is  perpetually  tormented.  While  the  person  who  seeks  support  from  the
first point and help from the second, experiences many pleasures and delights in his
heart and spirit, so that he is both consoled, and his conscience is at ease. 

FOURTH POINT  

Through showing that similar pleasures exist and will be bestowed, the light of belief
removes the pain that occurs when lawful pleasures start to fade. Furthermore, through
pointing out the source of bounties, it ensures that the bounties continue and do not diminish. 

                                             

1 Qur’an, 2:115. 

652

Similarly, through showing the pleasure of renewed acqaintance, it removes the
pain of separation and parting. That is to say, while many pains occur at the thought
of  the  passing  of  a  single  pleasure,  belief  removes  them  by  calling  to  mind  the
recurrence of the pleasure. In any event there are further pleasures in the renewal of
pleasure.  If  a  fruit  has  no  tree,  its  pleasure  is  restricted  to  and  ceases  on  its  being
eaten, and its ceasing is the cause of sorrow. But if the fruit’s tree is known, there is
no pain when the fruit ceases to exist, for there are others to come in its place. 

At the same time, renewal is in itself a pleasure. For what troubles the human spirit
most are the pains arising from separation. Whereas the light of belief removes those
pains through the hope of renewed meeting and the recurrence of similar encounters. 

FIFTH POINT  

The things among these beings man imagines to be hostile and foreign, and life-
less and lost as though orphans or dead, the light of belief shows to him as friends and
brothers, as living, and as glorifying God. That is to say, a person who looks with the
eye of heedlessness supposes the beings in the world to be harmful like enemies, and
he takes fright; he sees things as foreign. For in the view of misguidance, there are no
bonds of brotherhood between the things of the past and those of the future. There is
only an insignificant, partial connection between them. As a consequence, the broth-
erhood of the people of misguidance is only for one minute within thousands of years. 
In the view of belief, all the heavenly bodies appear as living and as familiar with
one another. Belief shows each of them to be glorifying its Creator through the tongue
of its being. It is in this respect that all the heavenly bodies possess a sort of life and
spirit  according  to  each.  There  is  no  fear  and  fright  therefore  when  the  heavenly
bodies are considered with this view of belief; there is familiarity and love.  

The  view  of  unbelief  sees  human  beings,  powerless  as  they  are  to  secure  their
desires,  as  ownerless  and  without  protector;  it  imagines  them  to  be  grieving  and
sorrowful like weeping orphans on account of their impotence. The view of belief on
the other hand, sees them as living creatures; not as orphans but officials charged with
duties; as servants glorifying and extolling God.  

653

SIXTH POINT  

The  light  of  belief  depicts  this  world  and  the  hereafter  as  two  tables  displaying
numerous  varieties  of  bounties  from  which  a  believer  benefits  through  the  hand  of
belief,  his  inner  and  external  senses,  and  his  subtle,  spiritual  faculties.  In  the  view  of
misguidance,  the  sphere  from  which  a  living  being  may  benefit  diminishes  and  is
restricted  to  material  pleasures.  While  in  the  view  of  belief,  it  expands  to  a  sphere
which  embraces  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  Yes,  a  believer  considers  the  sun  to be a
lamp  hanging  in  the  roof  of  his  house,  and  the  moon  to  be  a  night-light.  They  thus
become  bounties  for  him,  and  the  sphere  from  which  he benefits  is  broader  than the
heavens. With the eloquent verses, 

And He has made subject to you the sun and the moon,2 

and, 

He it is Who enables you to travel the land and the sea,3 

the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition alludes to these wonderful bounties and blessings
which arise from belief. 

SEVENTH POINT  

It  is  known  through  belief  that  God’s  existence  is  a  bounty  surpassing  all  other
bounties, a great bounty which is a source, a fountain, containing endless varieties of
bounties,  innumerable  sorts  of  blessings,  and  uncountable  kinds  of  gifts.  It  is
consequently  incumbent  on  man  and  a  debt  to  offer  praise  and  laudation  for  the
bounties of belief to the number of particles in the world. A number of these have been
shown in various parts of the Risale-i Nur; discussing belief in God, they raise the veil
from these bounties and point them out. 

One of the bounties for which praise should be offered with all the praise that the
phrase “All praise be to God!” indicates with the ‘Lam of specification,’4 is the bounty
of  Divine  mercy.    Indeed,  mercy  comprises  bounties  to  the  number  of  living  beings
which  manifest  Divine  mercy.  For  man  in  particular  is  connected  with  all  living
creatures,  and  in  this  respect  is  gladdened  by  their  happiness  and  saddened  by  their
pain. Thus, a bounty found in a single individual is a bounty also for his fellows.   

Another  which  comprises  bounties  to  the  number  of  children  which  are  blessed
with  their  mother’s  tenderness,  and  which  deserves  praise  and  laudation,  is  Divine
compassion. Yes, a person with conscience who feels  

                                             

2 Qur’an, 14:33. 
3 Qur’an, 10:22. 
4 ‘Lam of specification’; that is, the li in al-hamdulillah. [Tr.] 

654

sorrow and pity at the weeping of a motherless, hungry child, surely feels pleasure at a
mother’s compassion for her child, surely he is pleased and happy. Thus, pleasures of
this sort are each a bounty and require praise and thanks.    

Another  of  the  bounties  requiring  praise  and  thanks  to  the  number  of  all  the
varieties  and  instances  of  wisdom  contained  in  the  universe  is  Divine  wisdom.  For
just  as  man’s  self  is  endowed  with  the  manifestation  of  Divine  mercy  and  his  heart
with the manifestation of Divine compassion, so too does his intellect take pleasure at
the  subtleties  of  Divine  wisdom.  So  in  this  respect  they  require  endless  praise  and
laudation through the declaring of “All praise be to God!” 

Another is the bounty of preservation, for which praise should be offered to the
number  of  manifestations  of  the  Divine  Name  of  Inheritor,  and  the  number  of  des-
cendants who endure after the passing of their forbears, and the number of the beings
of the next world, and the number of men’s actions which are preserved so as to be the
means of their receiving their rewards in the hereafter; praise should be offered with so
great an “All praise be to God!” that it fills all space with its sound. For the continu-
ation of a bounty is more valuable than the bounty itself. The perpetuation of pleasure
is more pleasurable than the pleasure itself. To abide permanently in Paradise is su-
perior to Paradise itself; and so on. Consequently, the bounties which Almighty God’s
attribute of Preserver comprise are greater and far superior to all the bounties existent
in all the universe. Thus, this attribute requires an “All praise be to God!” as great as
the  world.  You  can  compare  the  rest  of  the  Divine  Names  with  the  four  mentioned
here, and since in each are endless bounties, each requires endless praise and thanks. 
Likewise, the Prophet Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), who is the
means of attaining the bounty of belief and has the authority to open all the treasuries
of bounty, is also such a bounty that mankind bears for all eternity the debt of praising
and applauding him. 

Likewise, the bounties of Islam and the Qur’an, which are the index and source of
all varieties of bounties, material and spiritual, require and deserve unending, infinite praise. 

EIGHTH POINT  

Praise be to God, Whom, according to the Qur’an of Mighty Stature, which is its
expounder,  this  mighty  book  known  as  the  universe  praises  and  extols  with  all  its
chapters and sections, all its pages and lines, all its world and letters — the Most Pure
and Holy One, Whom it praises and  

655

extols  through  making  manifest  His  attributes  of  beauty  and  perfection.  It  is  as 
follows:  

According to its capacity, whether great or small, each inscription in this mighty
book praises and extols its Inscriber, Who is the Single and Eternally Besought One,
through displaying His glorious attributes.   

Likewise, each inscription in the book of the universe offers praise through exhibiting

the attributes of Beauty of its Scribe, Who is the Most-Merciful and Compassionate One.   

Likewise, through reflecting and mirroring the manifestations of the Most Beauti-
ful  Names,  all  the  inscriptions  and  points  and  embroideries  in  this  book  utter  the
praises of the Most Pure and Holy One through lauding, glorifying, and exalting Him.  
Likewise, each ode in this book of the universe extols and glorifies its Composer,

Who is All-Powerful and All-Knowing. 

NINTH POINT  
... ... ...5 

                                             

5 I  do  not  have  the  key  to  these  cyphers  that  I  might  decode  them.  Moreover, the head of one
who  is  fasting  can  neither  decypher  them,  nor  disclose their meanings. Forgive me, I could do only
this much, and that through the moral assistance of the author, the spiritual effulgence of the Night of
Power, and being in the vicinity of Mawlana Jalaluddin. 

                                                                                                  The translator,  
                                                                                                Abdülmecid Nursi 

656

The Supplicant 

My demolished grave in which are piled up 
Seventy-nine dead Said’s2 with his sins and sorrows.
The eightieth is a gravestone to a grave;
Altogether they weep at Islam’s decline.3 
Together with my gravestone and moaning grave of dead Said’s
I go forward to the field of tomorrow’s future. 
I am certain that the skies of the future and Asia 
Will together surrender to Islam’s clean, shining hand. 
For it promises the prosperity of belief; 
It affords peace and security to mankind. 

FOOTNOTES 
1. This line is his signature.1 
2.  Since  the  body  is  renewed  twice  every  year,  it  means that  [each  year] two Said’s have died.
Also, this year Said is in his seventy-ninth year. It means one Said has died every year, so that he will
live  to  this  date.  [Bediuzzaman  died  in  1379  according  to  the  Hijri  calendar,  and  his  grave  was
demolished and moved in 1380. —Tr.] 

3. With a premonition of the future, he perceived its present state, twenty years later. 

                                             
1 This line is his signature. 

