1

THE FLASHES COLLECTION 

 

2

3

From the 
Risale-i Nur 
Collection 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Flashes 
Collection 

 
 
 
 
Bediuzzaman 
Said Nursi 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Translated from the Turkish ‘Lem’alar’ 
by Şükran Vahide 
 
 
2009 Edition. 
 
Copyright © 2009 by Sözler Neşriyat A.Ş. 
All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced by any means 
in whole or in part without prior written permission. 
For information, address: 
Sözler Neşriyat A.Ş., Nuruosmaniye Cad., Sorkun Han, No: 28/2, 
Cağaloğlu, Istanbul, Turkey. 
Tel: 0212 527 10 10;   Fax: 0212 520 82 31 
E-Mail: info@sozler.com.tr 
Internet: www.sozler.com.tr 
  
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

5

Contents 

 
 
 
THE FIRST FLASH: An instructive explanation of the verse, “But he cried through 
the depths of the darkness…” the famous supplication of the Prophet Jonah 
(UWP), showing its relevance for everyone. 

17  

THE SECOND FLASH: The famous supplication of the Prophet Job (UWP), 

“When he called upon his Sustainer saying: ‘Verily harm has afflicted me…’” is 
21 
expounded in five points, providing a true remedy for the disaster-struck. 

THE THIRD FLASH: Three points expounding with the phrases “The Eternal One, 
He is the Eternal One!” two important truths contained in the verse, “Everything 
shall perish save His countenance…” 

30 

THE FOURTH FLASH: The Highway of the Practices of the Prophet (UWBP). 
This solves and elucidates with complete clarity one of the major points of 
conflict between the Sunnis and the Shi‘a, the question of the Imamate, and 
expounds two important verses in four points.  35 

THE FIFTH FLASH is included in the Twenty-Ninth Flash. 

THE SIXTH FLASH is also included in the Twenty-Ninth Flash. 

THE SEVENTH FLASH: This describes seven predictions about the Unseen in the 
three final verses of Sura al-Fath. Its Postscript describes a further example of 
this aspect of the Qur’an’s miraculousness in the verses “All who obey God and 
His Messenger…” While the Conclusion demonstrates a clear example of another 
aspect of its miraculousness, ‘coincidences.’.  46 

THE EIGHTH FLASH is published in Sikke-i Tasdik-i Gaybî (The Ratifying Stamp 

of the Unseen) and hand-duplicated editions of Lem’alar (The Flashes 
Collection), and is not included in the present collection. 

 

6

THE NINTH FLASH: The answers to four questions asked by Bediuzzaman’s 

student, Hulûsi Bey:   58 

The First concerns his descent from the Prophet (UWBP). 

59 

The Second points out with brilliant clarity the way of the Unity of Existence and 

how it is in error. 

59 

The Third concerns the science of jafr.  62 

The Fourth is about Jesus (UWBP) having a human father. 

63 

Finally is an Addendum to the question about Ibn al-‘Arabi and the Unity of 

Existence. 

66 

THE TENTH FLASH: Fourteen Blows dealt by Divine Compassion received by 
students of the Risale-i Nur in their service of the Qur’an, for errors they have 
made due to human nature. 

70 

THE ELEVENTH FLASH: Entitled The Stairway of the Practices of the Prophet 
and Antidote for the Sickness of Innovations, this important treatise consists 
of eleven points about the Sunna of God’s Messenger (UWBP). 

81 

THE TWELFTH FLASH: Two verses are explained which have been challenged 

and criticized by scientists: 

The First explains in two points that all sustenance is bestowed directly by the 

All-Powerful One, from the treasury of His mercy. 

95 

The Second proves in two important matters, the first consisting of four points, 

that the earth has seven levels in seven respects, as the heavens consist of seven 
levels.   98 

THE THIRTEENTH FLASH: This explains, through thirteen indications, the 

meaning of the phrase: “I seek refuge with God from Satan the Accursed.”  104 

THE FOURTEENTH FLASH consists of two stations: 

First Station: In reply to the First Question, which is about the earth resting on a 
Bull and a Fish, this sets out three important principles for the understanding of 
Hadiths. 128 

The Second Question is about the People of the Cloak. 132 

Second Station: This important piece expounds six mysteries contained in the 

verse “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.” 

134 

THE FIFTEEN FLASH: The indexes of Sözler (The Words), Mektûbat (Letters), 

and Lem’alar (The Flashes Collection), from the First to the Fifteenth Flashes. 
They are included in the relevant volumes. 

7

 

 

 

THE SIXTEENTH FLASH: The answers to various questions: 

The First: A relief from difficulties was predicted during Ramadan by those who 

divine the realities, why did it not come about? 

143 

The Second: Why did the author of the Risale-i Nur not oppose those who were 

oppressing him? 144 

The Third: Why did he oppose war, although with foreign forces interfering in the 

government, it would have excited Islamic zeal? 

145 

The Fourth: Why did he advise his students to be cautious and not to show all 

parts of the Risale-i Nur to everyone?  145 

Conclusion: The reply to a question about the Prophet’s (UWBP) beard. 

147 

The answers to three further matters, disputed by atheists: 

The First: Dhu’l-Qarnayn “saw the sun setting in a spring of murky water.” 

148 

The Second: Where is the Barrier of Dhu’l-Qarnayn? Who were Gog and Magog?

The Third is about Jesus (PUH) coming at the end of time and killing the Dajjal. 

149 

151 

A reply about two of the Five Hidden Things. 

152 

The reply to a question about man’s ten subtle faculties. 155 

THE SEVENTEENTH FLASH consists of fifteen notes taken from Bediuzzaman’s 

work entitled Zühre:.  157 

The First Note shows the reality of those things which captivate the human soul, 

severance from which turns man’s face to eternity. 

158 

The Second Note describes the Qur’anic principle of humility.  158 

The Third Note illustrates with a comparison the true face of death and life.  159 

The Fourth Note demonstrates that as it is generally the divine practice to restore 
and return things exactly the same, man, the perfect fruit of the universe, will be 
returned at the Last Judgement. 159 

The Fifth Note reveals by means of a comparison with Qur’anic guidance, the true 
face of Western civilization. Making believers feel repugnance towards it, this 
Notes offers remedies from the pharmacy of the Qur’an. 

160 

 

8

The Sixth Note unmasks the satanic wile of shaking believers in their faith due to 
the numerous unbelievers and their agreement in denying some of the truths of 
belief.  166 

The Seventh Note silences those pseudo-patriots who drive Muslims towards 

Western-type progress, greed, and worldly ambition, and offers Qur’anic cures to 
any looking towards apostasy or who have fallen into sin. 

168 

The Eighth Note demonstrates how in His munificence, Almighty God has 

included a reward and pleasure in all activity and striving. 

170 

The Ninth Note explains that the Prophets contain the reality of man, the seed of the 
universe, and that by following them in worship, man may attain to perfection 
and happiness. The phrase “God is Most Great!” repeated in the Friday and 
Festival Prayers is as though uttered by the globe of the earth. 

174 

The Tenth Note: Three sorts of evidences and proofs of knowledge of God, and 

the correct approaches to these. 175 

The Eleventh Note points out the compassion in the Qur’an’s manner of address, 

and its naturalness. 

176 

you die” 177 

The Twelfth Note: A supplication illustrating a meaning of the Hadith “Die before 

The Thirteenth Note: Five matters that have been the cause of confusion: 

The First: Strivers in the way of truth should think only of their own duties and 

not meddle in God’s concerns.  178 

The Second: Worship of God should look only to the divine command and divine 

pleasure. 180 

not exceed them.” 

180 

The Third: On the meaning of “Happy is the man who knows his limits and does 

The Fourth explains that it is not permissible to accept bounties not given in the 

True Bestower’s name, and demonstrates the true nature of apparent causes. 182 

The Fifth: The achievements of a community should not be ascribed to its leader 

or master. 

183 

The Fourteenth Note consists of four signs alluding to divine unity: 

First Sign: Man’s true object of worship and place of recourse can only be the 

One whose rule extends over the earth and the heavens. 

184 

 

9

Second Sign: Man’s intense innate love of immortality should be not for the 

mirror of his being, but for the manifestation of the Enduring One of Glory in 
the mirror. 

185 

Third Sign: The tip of a vast truth warning man, for although he is created with a 

capacity suitable to eternal life, he sometimes becomes entrapped in minute 
matters, due to the caprice of the soul.  185 

Fourth Sign: Worldly life and the life of the flesh are like a narrow grave. On 

entering the life of the heart and spirit, one enters a broad sphere of life, and the 
key to this world is “There is no god but God!” 

186 

The Fifteenth Note depicts the maximum manifestation of the divine name of 

Preserver. 

187 

THE EIGHTEENTH FLASH has been published in Sikke-i Tasdik-i Gaybî (The 
Ratifying Stamp of the Unseen) and in hand-duplicated editions of Lem’alar 
(The Flashes). 

THE NINETEENTH FLASH: On Frugality. Seven points expounding the verse 

“Eat and drink, but waste not in excess”. 

189 

THE TWENTIETH FLASH: On Sincerity. Seven causes of the awesome situation 
indicated by the question: “What is the reason for the conflict among the people 
of truth while the misguided and worldly co-operate without rivalry? 200 

THE TWENTY-FIRST FLASH: On Sincerity. Four rules whereby one may gain 
and preserve sincerity, the most important principle in works pertaining to the 
hereafter. 

213 

A Confidential Letter to Some of My Brothers. 

222 

THE TWENTY-SECOND FLASH consists of three indications, which comprise 

questions about the Risale-i Nur’s author, and their answers:  223 

First Indication: Why do the worldly meddle in your hereafter, although you do 

not meddle in their world, and the law does not interfere with recluses? 

224 

Second Indication: Why do you not apply to us? One who applies the law is not a 

tyrant. Through attracting attention, you oppose our principles of absolute 
equality. 225 

Third Indication: Why do you elude our republican laws under the cloak of being 

a recluse? Why do you assume the position of someone special? 

227 

 

10

Conclusion: An astonishing assault. 

230 

THE TWENTY-THIRD FLASH: On Nature. 

232 

Introduction: Three phrases, representing three ways, used by believers about the 

existence of things without realizing their implications: 

233 

The First Way: The formation of things through the coming together of causes in 

the universe. 

First Impossibility: The coming together by chance of the elements of living 

beings in perfect measure and balance. 234 

Second Impossibility: If a fly, for example, is attributed to causes, it necessitates 
that many of the elements and causes in the universe intervene physically in its 
being.  235 

Third Impossibility: “If a being has unity, it can only have issued from one 

hand,” particularly if it manifests life, together with perfect order and balance.
  236 

The Second Way: “It forms itself.” 

First Impossibility: The body resembles a finely ordered machine; if its particles 
are not working in accordance with the divine law, each would have to possess 
absolute attributes. 

236 

Second Impossibility: The particles of a living body stand together in perfect 
balance and order; if they are not dependent on the master architect of the 
universe, each would have to be both dominant over all the others and 
subordinate to them. 

237 

Third Impossibility: If your being is not ‘written’ by the pen of the All-Powerful 
One, but ‘printed’ by nature and causes, there would have to be printing-blocks 
in nature to the number of cells in your body  238 

The Third Way: “Nature necessitates it and makes it.” 

First Impossibility: If animate creatures are not ascribed directly to the 
manifestation of the Pre-Eternal Sun, each has to be a god with infinite 
attributes. 

239 

Second Impossibility: If attributed to nature, there would have to present in each 
bit of soil the means by which innumerable flowers and fruits could grow and 
be formed. 

239 

Third Impossibility: Two comparisons: 

The First: A wild savage enters a palace adorned with all the fruits of 
civilization. 

242 

 

11

The Second: A rustic bumpkin enters the bounds of a splendid palace and sees 
the soldiers at their drill. 

243 

Conclusion: Three questions and their answers. 

The First: What need does God have of our worship, so that He severely 

reproves those who give up worship?  248 

The Second: What is the secret in the ease in the creation and formation of 

things?  249 

correct?  252 

The Third: Philosophers say there is only composition and decomposition. Is this 

THE TWENTY-FOURTH FLASH: The Qur’an enjoins the veiling of women. Four 

instances of wisdom in this. 

254 

A Conversation with the Women, My Believing Sisters of the Hereafter: Three 

points showing that since compassion is one of the chief principles of the 
Risale-i Nur and women are champions of compassion, they are by nature 
drawn to it. 

259 

THE TWENTY-FIFTH FLASH: Message for the Sick. This consists of twenty-

THE TWENTY-SIXTH FLASH: Treatise for the Elderly. This consists of twenty-

five remedies.  265 

six hopes. 

285 

THE TWENTY-SEVENTH FLASH: The defence speeches from the Eskişehir 

trials, which have been published in hand-duplicated editions of The Flashes 
Collection, and in part in Bediuzzaman’s biography. 

THE TWENTY-EIGHTH FLASH consists of short pieces written in Eskişehir 

Prison: 

A Small Point Concerning an Important Verse: Hitherto unknown instances of 

wisdom in the creation of flies, and other creatures.  337 

Some aspects of the element of air, the throne of the divine will and command, and 

the Disjointed Letters at the start of some of the Qur’an’s Suras. 

342 

A discussion about divine speech and its infinity. 345 

An explanation of why the verse “And We sent down iron...” is phrased in this 

way. 

348 

eight head of cattle”...  351 

The same point explained in connection with the verse “And He sent down for you 

Pieces written in Eskişehir Prison as a true solace for the Risale-i Nur students. 353 

 

12

A Rule 

353 

A Short Piece 

355 

Part of My Defence Speech 

355 

  358 

A Warning – two short stories 

359 

An explanation of the verse “But when they forgot the warning they had received”.

A piece which may benefit everyone, in two points. First Point, the immediate 

reward present in good works.  361 

Second Point: Two verses whose meaning is not immediately apparent. 362 

The times of sleep and the Practices of the Prophet (UWBP). 

“This is good as well.” On salawat for the Prophet (UWBP). 

364 

365 

An explanation of the Unity of Existence. 366 

The answer to a question about the dispute between Mustafa Sabri and Musa 

Bekûf on the subject of Muhyiddin al-‘Arabi.  368 

What should be done at festival times. 

369 

On the evil-commanding soul and its faults. 

370 

How can incarceration in Hell for an infinite duration in return for unbelief of a 

short duration be justice? 

371 

A meaningful and subtle ‘coincidence’.  372 

An explanation of some verses about spying jinns and evil spirits and their 
repulsion which had been criticized by the people of misguidance.  373 

THE TWENTY-NINTH FLASH: This was written in compliance with the Qur’anic 
command to reflect on the creational signs in the universe, and shows the 
essence of the way of the Risale-i Nur, reflective thought. The Third of its six 
chapters is included in the present collection. It is on the phrase “God is Most 
Great” and comprises seven degrees.  377 

THE THIRTIETH FLASH: On the six divine names bearing the greatest name, 

consisting of six points: 

First Point: The Name Most Holy. This describes the cleanliness of the universe 

and all beings, one manifestation of this Name. 

391 

Second Point: The Name All-Just. The balance and equilibrium of the universe 

and all beings, one manifestation of the name All-Just. 

396 

 

13

Third Point: the Name Sapient  consists of five matters: 

First Matter: The greatest manifestation of the name of Sapient has made the 
universe like a book in every page of which hundreds of books have been 
written.  400 

Second Matter consists of two topics: 

First Topic: Beauty wants to reveal itself. 

401 

Second Topic: There is no place for partners in the dominions of the All-
Powerful Maker. 

402 

Third Matter: Each of the hundreds of sciences describes a manifestation of the 

name Sapient in one realm of creation. 403 

Fourth Matter: The wisdom of the All-Wise Maker, to which all beings testify 
with their hundreds of instances of wisdom, demands the resurrection of the 
dead. 

405 

Fifth Matter: consists of two topics: 

First Topic: There is no wastefulness in the nature of things; wastefulness 
being the opposite of the name Wise.  406 

Second Topic: The names of Sapient and All-Wise necessitate the 
messengership of Muhammad (UWBP). 

406 

Fourth Point: The Name of Single. This consists of seven indications: 

First Indication: Three stamps of divine unity on beings. 

409 

Second Indication: The beings in the universe are so interwoven that one that 

does not possess the universe as a whole, cannot have true disposal over any of 
its elements. 

411 

Third Indication: All things ascribe everything to the One who created them. 411 

Fourth Indication: Three points proving the infinite ease of unity and 

impossibility of associating partners with God. 

411 

Fifth Indication: As rulership rejects the interference of others, so divine 

rulership necessitates divine unity. 

416 

Sixth Indication: Divine singleness and unity are the basis of all perfections, the 
source of the wisdom in the universe’s creation, and the sole means of man’s 
desires being brought about. 

418 

Seventh Indication: The Messengership of Muhammad (UWBP) was 

necessitated by divine singleness and unity. Three evidences testifying to the 
importance of his collective personality. 

419 

 

14

Fifth Point: The Name Ever-Living. This consists of five signs: 

First Sign: The index-like answer to the questions: “What is life? What is its 
nature and purpose?” 

421 

Second Sign: Both the inner and outer faces of life are transparent and unsullied; 
apparent causes have not been made a veil to the disposals of divine power.  423 

Third Sign: Life is the result of the universe; thanks and worship are the result of 

life and the ultimate reason for the universe’s creation. 

424 

Fourth Sign: Life looks to the six pillars of belief and proves them.  425 

Fifth Sign: Life is a shining seal of divine unity on the face of the universe.  431 

Conclusion: The greatest name is not the same for everyone.  433 

Sixth Point: The Name Self-Subsistent. This consists of five rays: 

434 

First Ray: This describes the greatest manifestation of the name Self-Subsistent 

and reveals the true face of materialist and naturalist philosophies.  435 

Second Ray: This consists of two matters: 

The First Matter describes one aspect of the manifestation of Self-Subsistence, 
which affords a stability and permanence to all things. 

439 

The Second Matter points out some of the benefits and wisdom in things 
related to the mystery of Self-Subsistence. 

440 

Third Ray: Discusses the disclosure of the mystery of Self-Subsistence within 
divine creativity, including the first two branches of the wisdom in limitless 
divine activity.  442 

Fourth Ray: The third branch of the wisdom in the constant and astonishing 

activity in the universe. 444 

Fifth Ray consists of two matters: 

First Matter: The greatest manifestation of Self-Subsistence observed in the 
heavenly bodies and in minute particles. 

448 

A Summary examining the light formed by the six names of the greatest name.

 

448 

Second Matter: The manifestation of Self-Subsistence in the universe is at the 

level of unity and glory, and in man at the  

15

level of oneness and beauty. Man’s duties and the ways in which he acts as a 
mirror to the Self-Subsistent One 

449 

Note on the Turkish alphabet . 

 

A Brief Look at Bediuzzaman Said Nursi’s Life, The Risale-i Nur, and The Flashes 
Collection 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

16

17

In the Name of God, 
The Merciful, the Compassionate 

 
But he cried through the depths of darkness, “There is no god but You; Glory 
be unto You! I was indeed among the wrongdoers!”(21:87) * When he called 
upon his Lord saying: “Verily harm has afflicted me, and You are the Most 
Merciful of the Merciful.”(21:83) * But if they turn away, say: “God suffices 
me, there is no god but He; in Him do I place my trust – He the Sustainer of 
the Throne [of Glory] Supreme!”(9:129) * For us God suffices, and He is the 
Best Disposer of Affairs.(3:178) * There  is  no strength and  no power other 
than  through  God,  the  High,  the  Mighty.1  *  O  Eternal  One,  You  alone  are 
Eternal! O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal! * And to those who believe 
guidance and healing.(41:44) 

[This, the first section of the Thirty-First Letter, consists of six flashes 
each of which depicts one of the many lights of the above verses and 
phrases.  Their  recital  thirty-three  times  each  particularly  between 
Maghrib  and  ‘Isha,  the  prayers  at  sunset  and  nightfall,  is  highly 
meritorious.] 

                                                 

1 1. See, Bukhari, Maghazi, 38; Muslim, Dhikr, 44-6. 
* The translations of the First, Second, and Twentieth Flashes were originally made by Hamid 

Algar, Professor of Near Eastern Studies in the University of California, Berkeley, U.S.A., and 
published by the Risale-i Nur Institute of America in 1975. They have been slightly amended to fit the 
present work. (Tr.) 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

18

 
 
The First Flash 

 
 
 
The supplication of Yunus ibn Matta2 (Peace be upon our Prophet and upon him) 
is  a  most  powerful  supplication,  a  most  effective  means  for  obtaining  answer  to 
prayer.3 The gist of the celebrated story of Jonah (Peace be upon him) is as follows: 

He was cast into the sea and swallowed by a large fish. The sea was stormy, the 
night  turbulent  and  dark,  and  hope  exhausted.  But  it  was  while  he  was  in  such  a 
situation that his supplication: 

There is no god other than You, Glory be unto You! Indeed, I was among the 
wrongdoers(21:87) 

acted  for  him  as  a  swift  means  of  salvation.  The  secret  of  his  supplication’s  power 
was this: 

In  that  situation  all  causes  were  suspended,  for  Jonah  needed  to  save  him  one 
whose  command  should  constrain  the  whale  and the  sea,  and  the  night  and  the  sky. 
The night, the sea, and the whale were united against him. Only one whose command 
might subdue all three of these could bring him forth on the strand of salvation. Even 
if the entirety of creation had become his servants and helpers, it would have been of 
no  avail.  For  causes  have  no  effect.  Since  Jonah  saw  with  the  eye  of  certainty  that 
there  was  no  refuge  other  than  the  Causer  of  Causes,  and  unfolded  to  him  was  the 
meaning of divine oneness within the light of divine unity, his supplication was able 
suddenly to subdue the night, the sea, and the whale. Through the light of divine unity 
he was able to transform the belly of the whale into a submarine; and the surging sea, 
which  in  its  awesomeness  resembled  an  erupting  volcano,  into  a  peaceable  plain,  a 
pleasant place of excursion. Through the light of unity, he was able to sweep the sky’s 
countenance clear of all  

2  The Prophet Yunus in the Qur’an is the Biblical Jonah, which name is henceforth used in the 

                                                 

present work. (Tr.) 

3 Tirmidhi, Da‘wat, 81; Musnad, i, 170. 
 

 

19

clouds,  and  to  set  the  moon  over  his  head  like  a  lantern.  Creation  that  had  been 
pressing  and  threatening  him  from  all  sides  now  showed  him  a  friendly  face  from 
every direction. Thus he reached the shore of salvation, where beneath the creeping-
gourd tree he observed this favour of his Lord. 

Now we are in a situation one  hundred times more awesome than that in which 
Jonah (Peace be upon him) first found himself. Our night is the future. When we look 
upon our future with the eye of neglect, it is a hundred times darker and more fearful 
than  his  night.  Our  sea  is  this  spinning  globe.  Each  wave  of  this  sea  bears  on  it 
thousands of corpses, and is thus a thousand times more frightening than his sea. Our 
fish is the caprice of our soul which strives to shake and destroy the foundation of our 
eternal life. This fish is a thousand times more maleficent than his. For his fish could 
destroy a hundred-year lifespan, whereas ours seeks to destroy a life lasting hundreds 
of millions of years. This being our true state, we should in imitation of Jonah (Peace 
be upon him) avert ourselves from all causes and take refuge directly in the Causer of 
Causes,  that  is,  our  Lord  and  Sustainer.  We  should  say:  “There  is  no  god but  You, 
Glory be unto You! Indeed I was among the wrongdoers,” and understand with  full 
certainty that it is only He who can repel from us the harm of the future, this world, 
and  caprice  of our  souls, united  against  us because of  our  neglect  and  misguidance. 
For the future is subject to His command, the world to His jurisdiction, and our soul 
to His direction. 

What  cause  is  there  other  than  the  Creator  of  the  heavens  and  earth  who  can 
know the most subtle and secret thoughts of our heart; who can lighten the future for 
us  by  establishing  the  hereafter;  who  can  save  us  from  the  myriad  overwhelming 
waves of the world? No, outside that Necessarily Existent One, there is nothing that 
can in any way give aid and effect salvation except by His consent and command. 

This  being  the  case,  considering  that  as  a  result  of  his  supplication,  the  whale 
became for Jonah a  vehicle, or a submarine, and the sea,  a peaceable plain; and the 
night  became  gently  lit  for  him  by  the  moon,  so  too,  we  should  make  the  same 
supplication: “There is no god but You, Glory be unto You! Indeed I was among the 
wrongdoers.” 

With the sentence “There  is  no god but You” we draw the  gaze of mercy upon 
our future; with the word “Glory be unto You!” we draw it upon our world; and with 
the  phrase  “Indeed  I  was  among  the  wrongdoers,”  we  draw it  upon  our  soul.4  Thus 
our  future  is  illumined  with  the  light  of  belief  and  the  moonlike  luminosity  of  the 
Qur’an, and the awe and terror of the night  

                                                 

4 See, Bukhari, Adhan, 149; Tawhid, 9; Muslim, Dhikr, 47-8; Hudud, 23. 
 

 

20

are transformed into tranquillity and joy. Then too, embarking on the ship of the truth 
of  Islam,  fashioned  in  the  dockyard  of  the  Most  Wise  Qur’an,  we  may  pass  safely 
over the sea of this earthly abode, which through the alternation of  life  and death is 
boarded by corpses unnumbered, borne on the waves of the  years and centuries, and 
cast into nothingness. Once aboard that ship we may reach the shore of salvation and 
fulfil  our  life’s  duty.  The  tempest  and  surging  of  the  sea  will  appear  a  series  of 
pleasing  images  on  a  screen,  and  instead  of  inspiring terror  and  dread,  will  delight, 
caress and illumine the reflective and the meditative gaze. By virtue of the mystery of 
the Qur’an, and the effect of that Criterion of Truth and Falsehood, our soul will no 
longer  ride  us,  but  instead  become  our  mount.  As  we  ride  it,  it  will  be  for  us  a 
powerful means for the attainment of life everlasting. 

I n  S h o r t : Man, in accordance with the comprehensive nature of his being, as 
he suffers and shakes with malaria, so also he suffers from the shaking and tremors of 
the earth, and the supreme convulsion of all beings on the Day of Resurrection. As he 
fears the infinitesimal microbe, he also fears the shooting star that appears among the 
heavenly bodies. As he loves his home, he also loves the wide world. As he loves his 
little  garden,  he  also  ardently  loves  infinite  and  eternal  paradise.  Man’s  object  of 
worship,  Lord,  refuge,  saviour,  and  goal  then  can  only  be  the  One  in  the  grasp  of 
whose power is the whole universe, under whose command are both atom and planet. 
Man should therefore constantly say like Jonah (Peace be upon him): 

There  is  no  god  but  You,  Glory  be  unto  You!  Indeed  I  was  among  the 
wrongdoers. 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

21

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

The Second Flash 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
When he called upon his Lord saying: “Verily harm has afflicted me, and 
You are the Most Merciful of the Merciful!”(21:83) 

 
The supplication of Job (Upon whom be peace), the champion of patience, is both 
well-tested and effective. Drawing on the verse, we should say in our supplication, “O 
my Lord and Sustainer! Indeed harm has afflicted me, and You are the Most Merciful 
of the Merciful.” 

The gist of the well-known story of Job1 (Upon whom be peace) is as follows: 
While afflicted with numerous wounds and sores for a long time, he recalled the 
great recompense to be had for his sickness, and endured it with utmost patience. But 
later, when the worms generated by his wounds penetrated to his heart and his tongue, 
the  seat  of  the  remembrance  and  knowledge  of  God,2  he  feared  that  his  duty  of 
worship  would  suffer,  and  so  he  said  in  supplication  not  for  the  sake  of  his  own 
comfort, but for the sake of his worship of God: 

“O Lord! Harm  has afflicted me; my remembrance of You with my tongue and 
my worship of You with my heart will suffer.” God Almighty then accepted this pure 
sincere,  disinterested  and  devout  supplication  in  the  most  miraculous  fashion.  He 
granted to Job perfect good health and made manifest in him all kinds of compassion.3 
This Flash contains five points: 

                                                 

Zuhd, 49. 

1 See, Tabari, Jami‘ al-Bayan, xvii, 71-2; Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, vi, 426; Ibn al-Mubarak, al-

2 See, Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh, i, 98-100. 
3 See, Qur’an, 21:84, 38:42-3. Also, Bukhari, Ghusl, 20; Tawhid, 35; Musnad, ii, 314. 
 

 

22

FIRST POINT 

 
Corresponding to the outer wounds and sicknesses of Job (Upon whom be peace), 
we have inner sicknesses of the spirit and heart. If our inner being were to be turned 
outward,  and  our  outer  being  turned  inward,  we  would  appear  more  wounded  and 
diseased than Job. For each sin that we commit and each doubt that enters our mind, 
inflicts wounds on our heart and our spirit. 

The wounds of Job (Upon whom be peace) were of such a nature as to threaten 
his  brief  worldly  life,  but  our  inner  wounds  threaten  our  infinitely  long  everlasting 
life.  We  need  the  supplication  of  Job  thousands  of  times  more  than  he  did  himself. 
Just as the worms that arose from his wounds penetrated to his heart and tongue, so 
too the wounds that sin inflicts upon us and the temptations and doubts that arise from 
those  wounds  will  –  may  God  protect  us!  –  penetrate  our  inner  heart,  the  seat  of 
belief,  and  thus  wound  belief.  Penetrating  too  the  spiritual  joy  of  the  tongue,  the 
interpreter of belief, they cause it to shun in revulsion the remembrance of God, and 
reduce it to silence. 

Sin, penetrating to the  heart, will blacken and darken it until  it extinguishes the 
light of belief.4 Within each sin is a path leading to unbelief. Unless that sin is swiftly 
obliterated  by  seeking  God’s  pardon,  it  will  grow  from  a  worm  into  a  snake  that 
gnaws on the heart. 

For example, a man who secretly commits a shameful sin will fear the disgrace 
that results if others become aware of it. Thus the existence of angels and spirit beings 
will be hard for him to endure, and he will long to deny it, even on the strength of the 
slightest indication. 

Similarly,  one  who  commits  a  major  sin  deserving  of  the  torment  of  Hell,  will 
desire the non-existence of Hell wholeheartedly, and whenever he hears of the threat 
of  Hell-fire,  he  will  dare  to deny  it  on  the  strength of  a slight  indication  and  doubt, 
unless he takes up in protection the shield of repentance and seeking forgiveness. 

Similarly, one who does not perform the obligatory prayer and fulfil his duty of 
worship  will  be  affected by distress,  just  as  he  would be  in  case  of  the  neglect  of  a 
minor  duty  toward  some  petty  ruler.  Thus,  his  laziness  in  fulfulling  his  obligation, 
despite  the  repeated  commands  of  the  Sovereign  of  Pre-Eternity,  will  distress  him 
greatly,  and  on  account  of  that  distress  will  desire  and  say  to  himself:  “Would  that 
there were no such duty of worship!” In turn, there will arise from this desire a desire 
to deny God, and  

                                                 

4 See, Tirmidhi, Tafsir Sura 83:1; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 29; Muwatta, Kalam, 18; Musnad, ii, 297. 
 

 

23

bear enmity toward Him. If some doubt concerning the existence of the Divine Being 
comes to his heart, he will be inclined to embrace it like a conclusive proof. A wide 
gate  to  destruction  will  be  opened  in  front  of  him.  The  wretch  does  not  know  that 
although he is delivered by denial from the slight trouble of duty of worship, he has 
made himself, by that same denial, the target for milions of troubles that are far more 
awesome. Fleeing from the bite of a gnat, he welcomes the bite of the snake. 

There are many other examples, which may be understood with reference to these 

three, so that the sense of, 

Nay but their hearts are stained(83:14) 

will become apparent. 
 
SECOND POINT 

As  was  explained  concerning  the  meaning  of  divine  determining,  known  as 
destiny,  in  the  Twenty-Sixth  Word,  men  have  no  right  to  complain  in  the  case  of 
disasters and illness for the following three reasons:  

First Reason: God Most High has made the garment of the body with which He 
has clothed man a manifestation of His art. He has made man to be a model on which 
He  cuts,  trims,  alters  and  changes  the  garment  of  the  body,  thus  displaying  the 
manifestation of various of His names. Just as the name of Healer makes it necessary 
that illness should exist, so too the name of Provider requires that hunger should exist. 
And so on. 

The Lord of All Dominion has disposal over His dominion as He wishes. 
Second  Reason: It  is  by  means  of  disasters  and  sicknesses  that  life  is  refined,5 
perfected,  strengthened  and  advanced;  that  it  yields  results,  attains  perfection  and 
fulfils  its  own  purpose.6  Life  led  monotonously  on  the  couch  of  ease  and  comfort 
resembles not so much the pure good that is being, as the pure evil that is non-being; 
it tends in fact in that direction.  

Third Reason: This worldly realm is the field of testing, the abode of service. It 
is  not  the  place  of  pleasure,  reward,  and  requital.  Considering,  then,  that  it  is  the 
abode of service and place of worship, sicknesses and misfortunes – as long as they 
do not affect belief and are patiently endured7 – conform fully to service and worship, 
and even strengthen  it. Since they make each  hour’s worship equivalent to that of  a 
day,8 one should offer thanks instead of complaining. 

                                                 

5 See, Muslim, Birr, 52; Abu Da’ud, Jana’iz, 1; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, i, 1500. 
6 See, Bukhari, Marda, 1; Muslim, Birr, 52; Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 57; Muwatta, Jana’iz, 40. 
7 See, Tirmidhi, Da‘wat, 79; Nasa’i, al-Sunan al-Kubra, vi, 106. 
8 See, Darimi, Riqaq, 56; Musnad, ii, 159, 194, 198; iii, 148, 238, 258. 

 

24

Worship  consists  in  fact  of  two  kinds,  positive  and  negative.  What  is  meant  by 
the  positive  is  obvious.  As  for  negative  worship,  this  is  when  one  afflicted  with 
misfortune or sickness perceives  his own weakness  and helplessness, and turning to 
his  Compassionate  Lord,  seeks  refuge  in  Him,  meditates  upon  Him,  petitions  Him, 
and thus offers a pure form of worship that no hypocrisy can penetrate. If he endures 
patiently,  thinks  of  the reward  attendant  on  misfortune  and  offers  thanks,  then  each 
hour that he passes will count as a whole day spent in worship. His brief life becomes 
very long. There are even cases where a single minute is counted as equal to a whole 
day’s worship. 

I once was extremely  anxious because of an awesome illness that struck one of 
my brothers of the hereafter, Muhajir Hafız Ahmed.9 But then a warning came to my 
heart:  “Congratulate  him!”  Each  minute  he  spends  is  counted  as  a  whole  day’s 
worship. He was in any event enduring his illness in patience and gratitude. 

 

THIRD POINT 

As we have pointed out in one or two of the Words, whenever one thinks of his 
past life, he will say in his heart or with his tongue either “Ah!” or “Oh!” That is he 
will either experience regret, or say “Thanks and praise be to God!” Regret is inspired 
by the pains arising from the cessation of former pleasures and separation from them. 
For the cessation of pleasure is a pain in itself. Sometimes a momentary pleasure will 
cause everlasting pain. To think upon it will be like lancing a wound, causing regret to 
gush forth. 

As for the lasting spiritual pleasure that comes from the cessation of momentary 
pains  experienced  in  the  past,  it  inspires  man  to  exclaim,  “Thanks  and  praise  be  to 
God!”  In  addition  to  this  innate  tendency  of  man,  if  he  thinks  of  the  reward  that 
results from misfortune and the requital that awaits him in the hereafter, if he realizes 
that his brief life will count as a long life because of misfortune, then instead of being 
merely patient he should be thankful. He should say, “Praise be to God for every state 
other than unbelief and misguidance.”10 

                                                 

9 Muhajir Hafız Ahmed was a merchant in Barla* and among the first students of the Risale-i 
Nur. Bediuzzaman stayed in his guesthouse on first arriving in Barla in the early spring of 1926, and he 
assisted Bediuzzaman for the eight and a half years he remained in Barla. 

* Bediuzzaman’s place of exile, 1926-1934. A small village in Isparta Province 

in S. W. Turkey. (Tr.) 

10 Tirmidhi, Da‘wat, 45; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 23; Du‘a, 2. 

 

25

It is commonly said that misfortune is longlasting. Indeed it is, but not because it 
is  troublesome  and  distressing  as  people  customarily  imagine,  but  rather  because  it 
yields vital results just like a long life. 

 

FOURTH POINT 

As  was  explained  in  the  First  Station  of  the  Twenty-First  Word,  the  power  of 
patient  endurance  given  to  man  by  God  Almighty  is  adequate  to  every  misfortune, 
unless  squandered  on  baseless  fears.  But  through  the  predominance  of  delusion, 
man’s  neglect  and  his  imagining  this  transient  life  to  be  eternal,  he  squanders  his 
power  of  endurance  on  the  past  and  the  future.  His  endurance  is  not  equal  to  the 
misfortunes of the present, and he begins to complain. It  is as  if – God forbid! – he 
were  complaining  of  God  Almighty  to  men.  In  a  most  unjustified  and  even  lunatic 
fashion, he complains and demonstrates his lack of patience. 

If  the  day  that  is  past  held  misfortune,  the  distress  is  now  gone,  and  only 
tranquillity remains; the pain  has  vanished and the pleasure in  its cessation remains; 
the trouble is gone, and the reward remains. Hence one should not complain but give 
thanks for enjoyment. One should not resent misfortune, but love it. The transient life 
of the past comes to be counted as an eternal and blessed life because of misfortune. 
To think upon past pain with one’s fancy and then to waste part of one’s patience is 
lunacy. 

As far as days yet to come are concerned, since they have not yet come, to think 
now of the  illness or misfortune to be borne during them and display  impatience,  is 
also foolishness. To say to oneself “Tomorrow or the day after I will be hungry and 
thirsty” and constantly to drink water and eat bread today, is pure madness. Similarly, 
to think of misfortunes and sicknesses yet in the future but now non-existent, to suffer 
them already, to show impatience and to oppress oneself without any compulsion, is 
such stupidity that it no longer deserves pity and compassion.  

In  short,  just  as  gratitude  increases  divine  bounty,  so  too  complaint  increases 

misfortune, and removes all occasion for compassion. 

During  World  War  One,  a  blessed  person  in  Erzurum  was  afflicted  with  an 
awesome disease. I went to visit him and he said to me complaining bitterly: “I have 
not been able to place my head on the pillow and sleep for a hundred nights.” I was 
much grieved. Suddenly a thought came to me and I said: 

“Brother, the hundred difficult days you have spent are now just like one hundred 
happy days. Do not think of them and complain; rather look at them and be grateful. 
As  for  future  days,  since  they  have  not  yet  come,  place  your  trust  in  your 
Compassionate and Merciful Lord. Do not weep  

 

26

before being beaten, do not be afraid of nothing, do not give non-being the colour of 
being. Think of the present hour; your power of patient endurance is enough for this 
hour.  Do  not  act  like  the  maddened  commander  who  expects  reinforcement  on  his 
right wing by an enemy force deserting to join him from his left, and then begins to 
disperse his forces in the centre to the left and the right, before the enemy has joined 
him on the right. The enemy then destroys his centre, left weak, with a minimal force. 
Brother, do not be like him. Mobilize all your strength for this present hour, and think 
of divine mercy, reward in the hereafter, and how your brief and transient life is being 
transformed into a long and eternal form. Instead of complaining bitterly, give joyful 
thanks.” 

Much relieved, he said, “Praise and thanks be to God, my disease is now a tenth 

of what it was before.” 
 
FIFTH POINT consisting of three matters. 

F i r s t  M a t t e r : True and harmful misfortune is that which affects religion. 
One should at all times seek refuge at the divine court from misfortune in matters of 
religion and cry out for help.11 But misfortunes that do not affect religion in reality are 
not  misfortunes.  Some  of  them  are  warnings  from  the  Most  Merciful  One.  If  a 
shepherd  throws  a  stone  at  his  sheep  when  they  trespass  on  another’s  pasture,  they 
understand that the stone is intended as a warning to save them from a perilous action; 
full of gratitude they turn back.12 So too there are many apparent misfortunes that are 
divine warnings and admonishments, others that  constitute the penance of sin;13 and 
others  again  that  dissolve  man’s  state  of  neglect,  remind  him  of  his  human 
helplessness  and  weakness,  thus  affording  him  a  form  of  tranquillity.  As  for  the 
variety of misfortune that  is  illness, it  is  not at all a misfortune, as  has already been 
said, but rather a favour from God and a means of purification.14 There is a tradition 
which says: “As a tree drops its ripe fruit when shaken, so do sins fall away through 
the shaking of fever.”15 

Job (Upon whom be peace) did not pray in his supplication for the comfort of his 

soul, but rather sought cure for the purpose of worship, when  

                                                 

11 See, Tirmidhi, Da‘wat, 79; Nasa’i, al-Sunan al-Kubra, vi, 106. 
12 See, Bukhari, Iman, 39; Buyu’, 2; Muslim, Musaqat, 107; Abu Nu’aym, Hilyat al-Awliya’, i, 

11. 

13 See, Tirmidhi, Tafsir Sura 4:24; Musnad, ii, 303, 335, 402. 
14 See, Muslim, Birr, 52; Abu Da’ud, Jana’iz, 1; al-Daylami, al-Musnad, i, 123; al-Hakim al-

Tirmidhi, Nawadir al-Usul, i, 286. 

381, 441, 455; iii, 152. 

15 Bukhari, Marda, 3, 13, 16; Muslim, Birr, 45; Ibn Maja, Adab, 56; Darimi, Riqaq, 57; Musnad, i, 

 

27

disease was preventing his remembrances of God with his tongue and his meditation 
upon  God  in  his  heart.  We  too  should  make  our  primary  intent,  when  making  that 
supplication, the healing of the inward and spiritual wounds that arise from sinning. 

As far as physical diseases are concerned, we may seek refuge from them when 
they  hinder  our  worship.  But  we  should  seek  refuge  in  a  humble  and  supplicating 
fashion, not protestingly and plaintively. If we accept God as our Lord and Sustainer, 
then  we  must  accept  too  all  that  He  gives  us  in  His  capacity  of  Lord.  To  sigh  and 
complain in a manner implying objection to divine determining and decree is a kind 
of criticism of divine determining, an accusation levelled against God’s compassion. 
The  one  who  criticizes  divine  determining  strikes  his  head  against  the  anvil  and 
breaks  it.  Whoever  accuses  God’s  mercy  will  inevitably  be  deprived of  it.  To use  a 
broken  hand  to  exact  revenge  will  only  cause  further  damage  to  the  hand.  So  too  a 
man  who,  afflicted  with  misfortune,  responds  to  it  with  protesting  complaint  and 
anxiety, is only compounding his misfortune. 

S e c o n d   M a t t e r : Physical misfortunes  grow when they are seen to be 
large, and shrink when they are seen to be small. For example, a dream enters one’s 
vision  at  night.  If  one  pays  it  attention  it  swells  up  and  grows;  if  one  does  not,  it 
disappears. So too if one attempts to ward off an  attacking swarm of bees, they will 
become  more  aggressive;  whereas  if  one  pays  them  no  attention  they  will  disperse. 
Thus if  one  regards  physical  misfortunes  as  great  and  grants  them  importance,  they 
will grow, and because of anxiety pass from the body and strike root in the heart. The 
result  will  then  be  an  inward  affliction  on  which  the  outward  misfortune  fastens  to 
perpetuate itself. But if the anxiety is removed by contentment with the divine decree 
and  reliance  on  God,  the  physical  misfortune  will  gradually  decrease,  dry  up  and 
vanish, just like a tree whose roots have been severed. I once composed the following 
verses in description of this truth: 

Cry not out at misfortune, O wretch, come, trust in God! 
For know that crying out compounds the misfortune and is a great error. 
Find misfortune’s Sender, and know it is a gift within gift, and pleasure. 
So  leave  crying  out  and  offer  thanks;  like  the  nightingale,  smile  through  your 

If you find Him not, know the world is all pain within pain, transience and loss. 
So why lament at a small misfortune while upon you is a worldful of woe? Come, 

tears! 

trust in God! 

 

28

Trust in God! Laugh in misfortune’s face; it too will laugh. 
As it laughs, it will diminish; it will be changed and transformed. 

If in single-handed combat one smiles at an awesome enemy, his enmity will be 
changed  to  conciliatoriness;  his  hostility  will  become  a  mere  joke,  will  shrink  and 
disappear. If one confronts misfortune with reliance on God, the result will be similar. 
T h i r d  M a t t e r : Each  age  has particular  characteristics.16 In this age of 
neglect  misfortune  has  changed  its  form.  In  certain  ages  and  for  certain  persons, 
misfortune  is  not  in  reality  misfortune,  but  rather  a  divine  favour.  Since  I  consider 
those afflicted with illness in the present age to be fortunate – on condition that their 
illness  does  not  affect their  religion  –  it  does  not  occur  to  me  to oppose  illness  and 
misfortune,  nor  to  take  pity  on  the  afflicted.  Whenever  I  encounter  some  afflicted 
youth, I find that he is more concerned with his religious duties and the hereafter than 
are his peers. From this I deduce that illness does not constitute a misfortune for such 
people, but rather a bounty from God. It is true that illness causes him distress in his 
brief,  transient  and  worldly  life,  but  it  is  beneficial  for  his  eternal  life.  It  is  to  be 
regarded as a kind of worship. If he were healthy he would be unable to maintain the 
state  he  enjoyed  while  sick  and  would  fall  into  dissipation,  as  a  result  of  the 
impetuousness of youth and the dissipated nature of the age. 

 

Conclusion 

 
God  Almighty,  in  order  to display  His  infinite  power  and unlimited  mercy,  has 
made  inherent  in  man  infinite  impotence  and  unlimited  want.  Further,  in  order  to 
display  the  endless  embroideries  of  His  names,  He  has  created  man  like  a  machine 
capable  of  receiving  unlimited  varieties  of  pain,  as  well  as  infinite  varieties  of 
pleasure. Within that human machine are hundreds of instruments, each of which has 
different  pains  and  pleasures, different  duties  and  rewards.  Simply,  all  of  the  divine 
names manifested in the macroanthropos that is the world also have manifestations in 
the  microcosm  that  is  man.  Beneficial  matters  like  good  health,  well-being,  and 
pleasures  cause  man  to  offer  thanks  and  prompt  the  human  machine  to  perform  its 
functions in many respects, and thus man becomes like a factory producing thanks. 

                                                 

Adab al-Sami, i, 212, 407. 

16 See, Bayhaqi, Shu’ab al-Iman, iv, 263; Khatib al-Baghdadi, al-Jami‘ li-Akhlaq al-Rawi wa 

 

29

Similarly,  by  means  of  misfortune,  illness  and  pain,  and  other  motion-inducing 
contingencies, the other cogs of the human machine are set in motion and revolution. 
The mine of weakness, impotence, and poverty inherent in  human  nature is made to 
work.  It  induces  in  man  a  state  whereby  he  seeks  refuge  and  help  not  only  with  a 
single tongue, but with the tongue of each of  his  members. Thus by means of those 
contingencies  man  becomes  like  a  moving  pen  comprising  thousands  of  different 
pens. He inscribes the appointed course of his existence on the page of his life or the 
Tablet  in the  World  of  Similitudes;  he  puts  forth  a  declaration  of  the  divine  names; 
and  becomes  himself  an  ode  to  the  glory  of  God,  thus  fulfilling  the  duties  of  his 
nature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

30

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

The Third Flash 

[Emotion  and  spiritual  pleasure  have  become  mixed  in  this  Flash  to 
an  extent,  and  since  their  exuberance  does  not  much  heed  the 
principles  of  the  intellect  or  the  scales  of  thought  nor  conform  to 
them, it should not be weighed up on the scales of logic.] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Everything  shall perish  save  His  countenance;  His  is  the  command, and to 
Him shall you return.(28:88) 

The two phrases, “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal! * O Eternal One, You 
alone  are  Eternal!”  both  express  the  meaning  of  the  above  verse,  and  state  two 
important  truths.  It  was  because  of  this  that  some  of  the  chiefs  of  the  Naqshbandi 
Order compiled some special invocations based on repetition of the phrases, and held 
it to be a concise set of Naqshi supplications. Seeing that the two phrases express the 
verse’s meaning, we shall explain several points concerning the significant truth they 
state. 
 

FIRST POINT 

The first time “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!” is recited, like a surgical 

operation it severs the heart from everything other than God. It is as follows: 

By virtue of his comprehensive nature, man is connected with almost all beings. 
Also  included  in  his  nature  is  a  boundless  capacity  to  love.  For  these  reasons  he 
nurtures love towards all beings. He both loves the huge world as though it were his 
house,  and  he  loves  eternal  Paradise  as  though  it  were  his  garden.  However,  the 
beings  he  loves  do  not  stop,  they  depart,  and  he  constantly  suffers  the  pain  of 
separation. That boundless love of his becomes the means of boundless torment. 

However, the fault in suffering such torment is his, for he was given a heart with 
an infinite capacity to love in order to direct it toward One possessing infinite undying 
beauty. By misusing it and spending it on transitory  

 

31

beings, he has done wrong and suffers the punishment for his fault through the pain of 
separation. 

Thus, the first time he utters: “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!”, it severs 
his attachment to transitory beings; he leaves those objects of love before they leave 
him and he is thus cleared of his fault. It declares that love should be restricted to the 
Eternal Beloved, and expresses this meaning:  “You are the only being that endures! 
Everything other than You is transient. My heart cannot become attached to anything 
transient,  for  it  was  created  for  everlasting  love,  to  feel  ardour  lasting  from  pre-
eternity  to  post-eternity.  Since  those  innumerable  beloveds  are  transitory  and  they 
leave me and depart, declaring, ‘O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!’ I shall leave 
them  before  they  leave  me.  Only  You  are  immortal,  and  I  know  and  believe  that 
beings can only be immortal by Your making them so. In which case, they should be 
loved with love of You. They are not otherwise worthy of the heart’s affection.” 

When  in  this  state,  the  human  heart  gives  up  innumerable  objects  of  love; 
beholding the stamp of transitoriness on their beauty, it severs its attachment to them. 
It  otherwise  suffers  wounds  to  the  number  of  its  beloveds.  The  second  “O  Eternal 
One, You alone are Eternal!” is both a salve and an antidote for those wounds. That 
is,  “O  Eternal  One!  Since  You  are  Eternal,  that  is  sufficient,  You  take  the  place  of 
everything. Since You exist, everything exists!” 

Yes,  the  beauty,  bounty,  and  perfection  in  beings,  which  excite  love,  are 
generally signs of the Truly Enduring One’s beauty and bounty and perfections, and 
passing through many veils, are pale shadows of them; indeed, they are the shadows 
of the shadows of the manifestations of His most beautiful names. 

 

SECOND POINT 

Included in human nature is an intense love of immortality. Even, because of his 
power of  imagination,  man  fancies a  sort of  immortality  in  everything  he  loves.  He 
cries out from the depths of his being whenever he thinks of or sees their passing. All 
lamentations  at  separation  are  expressions  of  the  weeping  caused  by  love  of 
immortality. If there were no imagined immortality, there would be no love. It might 
even be said that the intense desire for immortality arising from that passionate love 
of immortality, and from the spontaneous general prayer for immortality, is a reason 
for  the  existence  of  the  eternal  realm  and  everlasting  Paradise.  The  Eternal  One  of 
Glory accepted man’s intense, unshakeable, innate desire and his powerful, effective, 
general prayer, for He created an eternal realm for him, a transient being. 

 

32

Is it at all possible that the Munificent and Compassionate Creator would accept 
the  insignificant wish of the tiny stomach and its  supplication through the tongue of 
disposition for a temporary immortality by creating innumerable delicious foods, and 
not  accept  the  intense  desire  of  all  humankind,  which  arises  from  an  overpowering 
innate  need, and its universal, constant, rightful,  just prayer  for immortality, offered 
through word and state? God forbid, a hundred thousand times!  It is impossible that 
He would not accept it. Not to accept it would be in keeping with neither his wisdom, 
nor His justice, nor His mercy, nor His power. 

Since man  is most desirous of immortality, all  his perfections and pleasures are 
dependent  upon  it.  And  since  immortality  is  particular  to  the  Eternal  One  of  Glory; 
and since the Eternal One’s names are enduring and immortal; and since the Eternal 
One’s mirrors take on the hue of the Eternal One, and reflect His decree, and manifest 
a sort of immortality;  for sure the matter most important for man, his most pressing 
duty,  is  to  form  a  relation  with  that  Eternal  One  and  to  adhere  to  His  names.  For 
everything  expended  on  the  way  of  the  Eternal  One  receives  a  sort  of  immortality. 
The second “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!” expresses this truth. In addition 
to  healing  man’s  innumerable  spiritual  wounds,  it  satisfies  the  intense  wish  for 
immortality inherent in his nature. 
 
THIRD POINT 

In  this  world,  the  effects  of  time  on  things, and  on  their  passing,  differ  greatly. 
Beings are one within the other like concentric circles, yet they differ in regard to the 
speed of their passage. 

Just as the hands of a clock counting the seconds, and those counting the minutes, 
hours, and days superficially resemble each other but differ in respect of their speed, 
so too the spheres of the body, soul, heart, and spirit in man differ from one another. 
For example, the body possesses an immortality, a life, and an existence in the present 
day, and even in the present hour while its past and future are dead and non-existent, 
but  the  heart’s  sphere  of  existence  and  life  extends  from many  days  previous  to  the 
present day and to many days in the future. Then the sphere of the spirit is vast; its life 
and existence extends from years previous to the present day to years subsequent to it. 
By  virtue of  this  capacity  –  in  respect  of knowledge,  love,  and  worship of  God 
the Lord and Sustainer and the pleasure of that Most Merciful One, from which spring 
the  life  of  the  heart  and  spirit  –  transient  life  in  this  world  contains  within  it  a 
perpetual life, results in an eternal life, and resembles everlasting life. 

 

33

Yes,  one  second  on  the  way  of  love,  knowledge,  and  pleasure  of  the  Truly 
Enduring One is like a  year, otherwise a  year is a second. A single second, even, on 
His  way  is  immortal  and  many  years.  A  hundred  years  of  the  people  of  neglect 
looking  to  this  world  are  like  a  single  second.  There  is  the  famous  saying:  “A 
moment’s separation  lasts a  year, and a  year’s union passes  in an  instant.” I say the 
complete opposite to this: a moment’s union for God’s sake within the bounds of the 
Eternal  One  of  Glory’s  pleasure  is  a  window  opening  onto  not  a  year’s  union,  but 
permanent  union.  While  not  one  year  but  perhaps  a  thousand  spent  in  heedlessness 
and misguidance pass in an instant. There is a saying more famous that confirms this: 
“With enemies the broad earth is like a small cup, while with  friends a needle’s eye 
becomes a broad arena.”1 

An  explicit  meaning  of  the  first  well-known  saying  above  is  this:  since  union 
with transitory beings is transient, however long it lasts it seems brief. A year of such 
union is as fleeting as a second; it is an illusion, a dream, causing regret and sorrow. 
Since the human heart desires immortality, it can receive in one year’s union only the 
tiniest  pleasure  within  a  fraction  of  a  second,  and  a  moment’s  separation  is  like  not 
one  year  but  many.  For  the  arena  of  separation  is  broad.  If  only  for  a  second, 
separation inflicts years of destruction on the heart, since it yearns for eternity. For it 
bodes of innumerable separations. As for physical and lowly loves, for them the past 
and future are filled with separations. 

While on the subject, we say this: O man! Do  you want to make  your brief and 
useless life immortal, long, beneficial, and fruitful? Since such a wish is demanded by 
humanity,  spend  your  life  on  the  way  of  the  Truly  Enduring  One.  For  everything 
turned to that Eternal One receives the manifestation of immortality. 

Since everyone  fervently desires  long  life and  yearns  for immortality; and since 
there is a means of transforming this fleeting life into perpetual life and it is possible 
to make  it  lengthy;  for sure anyone who has  not lost  his  humanity will  seek out the 
means and try to convert the possibility into reality and will act accordingly. Yes, the 
means is this: work for God’s sake, meet with others for God’s sake, labour for God’s 
sake; act within the bounds of “For God, for God’s sake, on account of God.”2 Then 
all the moments of your life will be turned into years. 

Alluding  to  this  truth,  verses  of  the  Qur’an  state  that  a  single  night  such  as the 

Night of Power is the equivalent of a thousand months, that is,  

                                                 

1 See, Ibn al-Jawzi, al-Mudkhish, i, 385; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 246. 
2 See, Tirmidhi, Sunna, 15; Abu Da’ud, Qiyama, 60; Musnad, iii, 438, 440. 
 

34

around  eighty  years.  The  expansion  of  time,  a  tried  principle  among  the  people  of 
sainthood  and  reality,  also  alludes  to  this  truth.  For  through  its  mystery,  a  few 
minutes’  Ascension  become  many  years  and  prove  the  existence  of  this  truth  and 
demonstrate  it  in  fact.  The  few  hours  of  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  Ascension  had  the 
length,  breadth,  and  comprehensiveness  of  thousands  of  years,  for  by  way  of  it  he 
entered the world of eternity, and a few minutes of that world comprise thousands of 
years of this world. 

There  are,  besides  this,  the  numerous  occurrences  of  the  expansion  of  time 
experienced by the saints, constructed on this truth. It is related that some of them did 
a  day’s  work  in  a  single  minute,  and  others  performed  a  year’s  duties  in  an  hour, 
while others recited the whole Qur’an in the space of a minute. Such veracious people 
of  truth  would  never  knowingly  stoop  to  lying.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  they 
observed exactly the fact of the expansion of time,3 which has been thus numerously 
and unanimously reported. 

The  expansion  of  time  experienced  in  dreams  is  a  sort  confirmed  by  everyone. 
Sometimes  a  day  in  the  waking  world,  or  many  days,  would  be  necessary  to 
experience  the  happenings,  words,  pleasures,  and  pains  experienced  in  a  minute’s 
dream. 

I n  S h o r t : For sure man is transitory, but he was created for immortality and 
to  be  a  mirror  to  the  Eternal  One,  and  he  was  charged  with  duties  which  produce 
eternal fruits, and was given a form that is the means to manifesting the impresses of 
an Eternal One’s eternal names. In which case, his true duty and happiness is to cling 
with all his powers and faculties to the names of that Perpetually Eternal One within 
the bounds of those things that please Him; it is to be turned towards Him, and to go 
to Him. As man’s tongue utters “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!,” so his heart, 
spirit, mind, and all his subtle faculties should declare:  

“He is the Eternal One! He is Pre-Eternal and Post-Eternal! He is the Everlasting 
and Perpetual!  He is the One who is sought, the  Beloved!  He is the One wished for 
and Worshipped!” 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise!(2:32) 
O our Sustainer! Do not take us to task if we forget or do wrong.(2:282) 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

                                                 

3 The verses, “Said one of them: ‘How long have we stayed [here]?’ They said, ‘We have stayed 
[perhaps] a day, or part of a day,’”(18:19) and, “So they stayed in their cave three hundred years, and 
[some] add nine [more]”(18:25) point to the traversing of time, while the verse, “Verily a day in the 
sight of your Sustainer is like a thousand years of your reckoning”(22:47) points to the expansion of 
time. 
 

 

35

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

The Fourth Flash 

The title, The Highway of the Practices of the Prophet was 
considered appropriate for this treatise. 

[The  Imamate  question  is  a  matter  of  secondary  importance,  but 
because of the excessive attention paid it, it was  as though  included 
among the matters of belief and dealt with by the sciences of kala\m 
and  the  principles  of  religion.1  Here,  it  is  discussed  partly  in  this 
respect  and  partly  in  respect  of  its  relevance  to  our  basic  duties 
towards the Qur’an and belief.] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Now has come a prophet from among yourselves; it heavily weighs upon him 
that  you  might  suffer;  full of concern  is he  for  you, and  full of  compassion 
and mercy towards the believers. * But if they turn away, say: God is enough 
for me, there is no god but He. In Him have I placed my trust, for He is the 
Lord  and  Sustainer  of  the  Mighty  Throne.(9:128-9)  *  Say:  I  ask  no 
recompense of you save love of close kin.(42:23) 

 
We shall point out in two stations two of the many vast truths contained in these 

glorious verses. 

First Station 

 
The first station consists of four points. 
 

FIRST POINT 

This  describes  the  perfect  compassion  and  mercy  of  God’s  Noble  Messenger 

(Upon whom be blessings and peace) towards his community.  

                                                 

1 al-Iji, Kitab al-Mawaqif, iii, 331; Ahmad b. Muhammad, Kitab Usul al-Din, 269, 279 

 

36

According  to  sound  narrations,  when  at  the  terror  of  the  resurrection  everyone 
including  the  prophets  will  cry  out  for  themselves,  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  will 
demonstrate  his  pity  and  compassion2  by  calling  out:  “My  community!  My 
community!”3 As is affirmed by those who disclose the realities, when he was born, 
his mother heard the same words among his supplications.4 Then the whole history of 
his life, as well as the benevolence he taught demonstrate his perfect compassion and 
clemency.  Also,  by  evincing  an  infinite  need  for  his  community’s  innumerable 
prayers,5 he showed a boundless compassion, for he showed that because of it he was 
concerned  with  the  happiness  of  all  of  them.  You  can  understand,  therefore,  how 
lacking  in  gratitude and  conscience  it  is  not  to observe  the  practices  of  so  kind  and 
compassionate a leader.   
 
SECOND POINT 

Among the universal, general duties of his prophethood, God’s Noble Messenger 
(Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  displayed  great  compassion  in  certain 
particular, minor matters. Superficially, his behaving so kindly in such matters seems 
unfitting  for  the  supreme  importance  of  the  prophetic  mission.  But  in  reality,  such 
minor matters were the tips or samples of a chain that would be the means whereby a 
universal,  general  function  of  prophethood  would  be  fulfilled.  The  greatest 
importance was therefore given to the sample for the sake of the mighty chain. 

For  example,  the  extraordinary  gentleness  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  showed 
towards Hasan and Husayn in their childhood and the great importance he gave them6 
was  not  only  out  of  love  and  natural  kindness  and  family  feeling,  it  was  rather 
because they were each the tip of a luminous thread of the office of prophethood, and 
the  source,  sample,  and  index  of  a  community  of  great  consequence  which  would 
receive the legacy of prophethood. 

Indeed,  the Messenger  (UWBP)  used  to  take  Hasan  (May God be pleased  with 
him) tenderly  into his arms and kiss  his  head7 for the sake of the  luminous, blessed, 
Mahdi-like  descendants  who  would  spring  from  him,  such  as  Shah  Geylani,  the 
Ghawth al-A‘zam,8 who would be the inheritors of pro 

                                                 

2 See, Bukhari, Tawhid, 32; Muslim, Iman, 326. 
3 Bukhari, Tawhid, 36; Tafsir Sura 17:5; Fitan, 1; Muslim, Iman, 326, 327; Tirmidhi, Qiyama, 10; 

Darimi, Muqaddima, 8. 

227, 228. 

4 See, Suyuti, al-Khasa’is al-Kubra, i, 80, 85, 91; al-Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-’Alamin, 224, 

5 See, Tirmidhi, Qiyama, 24. 
6 See, Bukhari, Fada’il al-Ashab, 22; Muslim, Fada’il al-S˘ahaba, 56, 60. 
7 See, Musnad, v, 47; al-Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, iii, 32; xx, 274. 
8 Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir Gilani, d. 561/1165-6. The eponymous founder of the Qadiri Order. (Tr.) 

 

37

phethood and would uphold the sacred Shari‘a of Muhammad. He saw with the eye of 
prophethood  the  sacred  services  they  would  perform  in  the  future,  and  applauded 
them.9 He kissed Hasan’s head as a sign of approval and encouragement. 

Also,  he  embraced  Husayn  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him)  and  showed  him 
importance and tenderness on  account of the illustrious Imams  like Zayn  al-‘Abidin 
and  Ja‘far  al-Sadiq,  and  the  numerous  Mahdi-like  luminous  persons,  the  true 
inheritors of prophethood, who would spring from his effulgent line, and for the sake 
of the religion of Islam and office of prophethood.  

Since with his heart with its knowledge of the Unseen, the Prophet Muhammad’s 
(UWBP) luminous vision and future-penetrating eye observed from the Era of Bliss in 
this world the Assembly of the Resurrection on the side of post-eternity, and from the 
earth saw Paradise, and watched events which  had occurred since the time of Adam 
and were concealed in the dark veils of the past, and even beheld the vision of the All-
Glorious  One,  he  surely  saw  the  spiritual  poles  and  the  Imams  who  were  to  be the 
inheritors of prophethood, and the Mahdis, who would follow on in the lines of Hasan 
and Husayn. And for sure he would kiss their heads in the name of all of them. Yes, 
Shah Geylani has a large part in his kissing Hasan’s head. 
 
THIRD POINT 

According to one interpretation, the verse:  

Say: I ask of you no recompense save love of close kin(42:23)  

has the meaning: “God’s Noble Messenger (UWBP) wants no reward for fulfilling the 
duties of messengership; he wants only love for his family.” 

If it is asked: According to this, it seems there is an advantage to be gained from 

a family relationship. Whereas, according to the meaning of:   

The most honoured of you in the sight of God is the most righteous of you,(49:13)  

prophethood functions in respect of closeness to God, not of family relationships? 

The  Answer:  With  his  vision  that  penetrated  the  Unseen,  God’s  Most  Noble 
Messenger (UWBP) saw that his family would become a light-giving tree in the world 
of Islam. It would be from his family that the overwhelming majority of those persons 
who would act as guides and preceptors instructing every level of the world of Islam 
in human attainment and per 

                                                 

9 See, Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 11; Musnad, iv, 172. 

 

38

fection would emerge. He divined that  his community’s prayer  for his family  in the 
final  section  of  the  prescribed  prayers:  “O  God,  grant  blessings  to  our  master 
Muhammad and to the family of our master Muhammad, as You granted blessings to 
Abraham  and  to  the  family  of  Abraham;  indeed,  You  are  Worthy  of  Praise,  Most 
Exalted”10 would be accepted. That is to say, just as the vast majority of the luminous 
guides among the people of Abraham were prophets of Abraham’s family and line,11 
so  he  saw  in  his  community  the  spiritual  poles  of  his  family  performing  the 
momentous duties of Islam, and in most of the paths and Sufi orders, like the prophets 
of  Israel.12  Therefore,  being  commanded  to  say:  “Say:  I  ask  of  you  no  recompense 
save love of close kin,” he wanted his community to love his family. 

There are numerous narrations corroborating this fact. He repeatedly decreed: “I 
leave  you  two  things.  If  you  adhere  to  them,  you  will  find  salvation:  one  is  God’s 
Book,  the  other  is  my  Family.”13  For  members  of  his  family  were  the  source  and 
guardians  of  his  practices  (Sunna)  and  were  charged  with  complying  with  them  in 
every  respect.  This  is  why  what  was  intended  by  this  Hadith  was  adherence  to  the 
Book  and  the  Prophet’s  practices.  That  is  to  say,  in  respect  of  the  office  of 
messengership  it  was  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  practices  that  were  sought  from  his 
family. So no one who abandoned his practices could truly be a member of his family, 
nor could such a person not be a true friend to them.14 

Also, the reason he desired his community to gather round his family15 was that, 
with God’s permission, he knew it was going to become very numerous in the course 
of  time,  and  that  Islam  was  going  to  become  weak.  An  extremely  strong  and  large 
mutually  supportive  group  of  people  was  therefore  necessary  to  be  the  instrument 
through which the Islamic world would progress spiritually and morally, with divine 
permission.  He  thought  of  this  and  desired  that  his  community  should  gather  round 
his family. 

Indeed, even if the members of the Prophet’s (UWBP) family were not greatly in 
advance of others  in matters of belief  and faith, they were still  far ahead of them in 
regard to submission, partiality, and partisanship. For they were followers of Islam by 
nature,  birth,  and  temperament.  Even  if  natural  partiality  is  weak  and  unworthy,  or 
unjustifiable even, it cannot be given  

                                                 

10 Bukhari, Anbiya’, 10; Muslim, Salat, 65-6. 
11 See, Ibn al-Hajar, Fath al-Bari, xi, 162. 
12 See, al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, iv, 384; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 83. 
13 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 31; Musnad, iii, 14, 17, 26. 
14 See, al-Tabarani, Mu‘jam al-Awsad, iii, 338; Abu Da’ud, Fitan, 2; Musnad, ii, 133. 
15 See, al-Bazzar, al-Musnad, ix, 343; al-Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, iii, 45-6; xii, 34. 

 

39

up. So would it be possible for a person to give up his support for a truth to which all 
his forefathers – who were most strong, most constant and true, and most illustrious – 
had  been  bound,  and  through  which  they  had  won  glory,  and  for  which  they  had 
sacrificed their lives, a truth the person clearly felt to be so fundamental and natural? 
Thus,  due  to  this  intense  partiality  and  natural  submission,  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP) 
family  accepted  the  least  hint  in  favour of  the religion  of Islam  as  though  it  were  a 
powerful  proof.  For  they  were  partial  by  nature.  Others  become  partial  only  after 
some powerful proof. 
 
FOURTH POINT 

In  connection  with  the  Third  Point,  we  shall  indicate  briefly  a  matter  that  has 
been disputed by the Shi‘ites and the Sunnis and has been magnified to such an extent 
that it has been included in the books on doctrine, among the fundamentals of belief.16 
The  Sunnis  say:  “‘Ali  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him)  was  the  fourth  of  the 
Rightly-Guided Caliphs. Abu Bakr the Veracious (May God be pleased with him) was 
superior to him and was more deserving of the  Caliphate, therefore it passed to him 
first.”17 While the Shi‘ites say: “It was ‘Ali’s right. An injustice was done to him. ‘Ali 
was  the  most  worthy  of  them  all.”  A  summary  of  the  arguments  for  their  claims  is 
this. They say: “The Hadiths of the Prophet (UWBP) about ‘Ali,18 and with his title of 
King of Sainthood his being the recognized authority of the vast majority of the saints 
and  spiritual  paths,  and  his  extraordinary  knowledge,  courage,  and  worship,  and  the 
Prophet’s (Upon whom be blessings and peace) intense concern for him and towards 
his descendants all show that he was the most worthy. The Caliphate was always his 
right; it was seized from him.” 

The  Answer:  The  fact  that  ‘Ali  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him)  followed  the 
first three Caliphs, whom he repeatedly acknowledged,19 and held the position of their 
Shaikh  al-Islam,  refutes  these  claims  of  the  Shi‘ites.  Furthermore,  the  victories  of 
Islam and the  struggles against its enemies  in the time of the  first three Caliphs and 
the events in ‘Ali’s time, refute the Shi‘ites’ claims, again from the point of view of 
the Islamic Caliphate. That is to say the Sunnis’ claim is rightful. 

If it is said, there are two sorts of Shi‘ites, the Sainthood Shi‘a and the  

                                                 

16 See, al-Taftazani, Sharh al-’Aqa’id (Turk. tr. Süleyman Uludağ), 321. 
17 See, Ahmad b. Hanbal, al-‘Aqida, i, 123; Ibn Abi ‘Izz, Sharh ‘Aqida al-Tahawiyya, i, 545, 548. 
18 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 19; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 11; Musnad, i, 84, 118; iv, 281. 
19 See, Bukhari, Fada’il Ashab, 5; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 7; Musnad, i, 106. 

 

40

Caliphate Shi‘a. Because they mixed hatred and politics the second group may have 
been unjust, but the first  group were not concerned with partisan politics. However, 
the Sainthood Shi‘a joined the Caliphate Shi‘a. That is, some of the saints of the Sufi 
orders looked on ‘Ali as superior and they endorsed the claims of the Caliphate Shi‘a. 
The Answer: ‘Ali (May God be pleased with  him) has to be considered in two 
respects. One is from the point of view of his personal perfections and rank, and the 
other  is  from  the  point  of  view  of  his  representing  the  collective  personality  of  the 
Prophet’s (UWBP) family. As for this collective personality, it displays an aspect of 
the Most Noble Messenger’s (UWBP) essential nature. 

Thus, in regard to the first point, foremost ‘Ali himself and all the people of truth 
gave  precedence  to  Abu  Bakr  and  ‘Umar.20  They  saw  their  ranks  as  higher  in  the 
service of Islam and closeness to God. As for the second point, as the representative 
of  the  collective  personality  of  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  family,  which  represents  an 
aspect  of  the  Muhammadan  Truth,  ‘Ali  has  no equal.  The  highly  laudatory  Hadiths 
about  ‘Ali21  look  to  this  second  point.  There  is  a  sound  narration  that  corroborates 
this:  the  Noble  Messenger  (UWBP)  decreed:  “The  descendants  of  each  prophet  are 
from himself. My descendants are those of ‘Ali.”22 

The  reason  the  Hadiths  praising  ‘Ali  more  than  the  other  three  Caliphs  have 
become  so  widespread  is  that  the  people  of  truth,  that  is,  the  Sunnis,  spread  many 
narrations  about  him  in  response  to  the  Umayyads  and  Kharijites  attacking  and 
disparaging him unjustly. The other Rightly-Guided Caliphs were not subject to such 
criticism and detraction, so no need was felt to spread Hadiths about them. 

Furthermore, the Prophet (UWBP) saw with the eye of prophethood the grievous 
events and internal strife to which ‘Ali would be exposed in the future, and in order to 
save  him  from  despair  and  his  community  from  thinking  unfavourably  of  him,  he 
consoled  him  and  guided  his  community  with  significant  Hadiths  like  “Whosever 
master I am, ‘Ali too is his master.”23 

                                                 

Tasawwuf, i, 57. 

20 See, al-Ghazali, Qawa’id al-‘Aqa’id, i, 228; al-Kalabazi, al-Ta‘arruf li-Madhhab Ahl 

21 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 19; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 11; Musnad, i, 84, 118; iv, 281. 
22 Tabarani, al-Majma‘ al-Kabir, no: 2630; al-Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, x, 333; al-Munawi, 

Fayd al-Qadir, 223, no: 1717. 

23 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 19; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 11; Musnad, i, 84, 118, 119, 152, 331; iv, 281, 

368, 370, 383; v, 347, 366, 419; al-Kattani, Nazm al-Mutanathir fi’l-Ahadith al-Mutawatir, 24; al-
Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, vi, 218; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, ix, 42; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 130; iii, 134. 

 

41

The  excessive  love  of  the  Sainthood  Shi‘a  towards  ‘Ali  (May  God  be  pleased 
with him) and – influenced by the Sufi Orders – their deeming him superior, does not 
make them answerable to the degree of the Caliphate Shi‘a. For those who follow the 
path of sainthood look towards their spiritual guides with love, and the mark of love is 
excess;24 it wants to see the beloved as greater than his rank. And that is how it sees 
him. Ecstatics may be forgiven excesses of love. So their deeming ‘Ali more worthy 
because of their love may be excused on condition it does not turn into disparagement 
of  the  other  Rightly-Guided  Caliphs  and  enmity  towards  them,  and  does  not  go 
beyond the fundamental teachings of Islam. 

As  for  the  Caliphate  Shi‘a,  since  political  prejudice  took  a  hold  of  them  they 
could  not  rid  themselves  of  hatred  and  aggression,  so  forfeited  their  right  to  be 
excused.  Even,  confirming  the  saying,  “Not  for  love  of  ‘Ali,  but  out  of  hatred  of 
‘Umar,”  since  Persian  national  pride  was  wounded  at  ‘Umar’s  hand,25  they  showed 
their revenge in the form of love of ‘Ali. So also ‘Amr ibn al-‘As’s rebellion against 
‘Ali  and  ‘Umar  ibn  al-Sa‘d’s  tragic  war  against  Husayn26  aroused  in  the  Shi‘a  an 
intense anger and enmity towards the name of ‘Umar. 

The Sainthood Shi‘a have no right to criticize the Sunnis, for the Sunnis have not 
decried ‘Ali, indeed, they love him sincerely. But they avoid the excessive love which 
is  described  as  dangerous  in  Hadiths.27  The  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  praise  of  ‘Ali’s 
followers  in  the  Hadiths28  refers  to  the  Sunnis.  For  it  is  the  Sunnis  among  ‘Ali’s 
followers  who  love  him  in  a  moderate  fashion  and  are  the  people  of  truth.  Just  as 
excessive love of Jesus (Upon whom be peace) is dangerous for Christians, so it has 
been  made  clear  in  sound  Hadiths  that  that  sort  of  excessive  love  for  ‘Ali  is 
dangerous.29 

If  the  Sainthood  Shi‘a say:  “Once  ‘Ali’s  consummate  spiritual  attainments are 

accepted, it is impossible to give precedence to Abu Bakr the Truthful.” 

The reply: It was as though the personal perfections of Abu Bakr, the  

                                                 

24 Abu Da’ud, Adab, 113; Musnad, v, 194; vi, 450. 
25 See, Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vi, 12, 21; al-Tabari, Tarikh al-‘Umam wa’l-Muluk, iii, 

283, 289. 

193. 

26 See, al-Tabari, Tarikh al-‘Umam wa’l-Muluk, iii, 298; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, viii, 

27 Musnad, i, 160; Nasa’i, al-Sunan al-Kubra, v, 137; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 132. 
28 al-Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Awsad, vi, 354; vii, 343. 
29 Bukhari, Ta’rikh al-Kabir, ii, 257; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Fada’il al-Sahaba: 1087, 1221, 1222; al-

Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, ix, 133; Ibn al-Jawzi, al-‘Ilal il-Mutanahiya, i, 223. 

 

42

Supremely Veracious, and ‘Umar, the Supreme Distinguisher between True and False 
(May God be pleased with them), had been placed in the pan of some scales together 
with their achievements during their Caliphates, realized through their performance of 
the duties inherited from the Prophet (UWBP), and in the other pan had been placed 
‘Ali’s  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him)  extraordinary  personal  perfections  together 
with  the  internal  Caliphate  struggles,  which  resulted  from  the  tragic  events  he  was 
compelled to enter upon and were the object of suspicion and distrust, and the Sunnis 
saw that Abu Bakr’s or ‘Umar’s or ‘Uthman’s (Dhi’l-Nurayn) pan weighed heavier, 
and so they gave them precedence. 

Moreover, as is proved in the Twelth and Twenty-Fourth Words, prophethood is 
so elevated in comparison to sainthood that a tiny manifestation of it is superior to a 
large  manifestation  of  sainthood.  In  regard  to  this,  the  successes  of  the  Supremely 
Veracious  and  the  Supreme  Distinguisher  between  True  and  False  during  their 
Caliphates  was  an  indication  for  the  Sunnis  that  their  share  in  the  legacy  of 
prophethood30  and  the  establishment  of  its  laws  had been  divinely  bestowed.  Since 
‘Ali’s  personal  perfections  did  not  dismiss  that  greater  share,  which  had  been 
inherited  from  the  Prophet  (UWBP),  he  acted  as  Shaikh  al-Islam  for  Abu  Bakr  and 
‘Umar, the two Illustrious Elders, in the time of their Caliphates, and esteemed them. 
How should the Sunnis, who love and revere ‘Ali, not love and revere the two Elders, 
whom ‘Ali loved and revered sincerely? Let us make this truth clear be means of an 
example: 

One of the sons of a very rich man is given twenty batmans31 of silver and four 
batmans of gold from his father’s legacy, and another is given five of silver and five 
of gold. So if the third is given three of silver and five of gold, of course the last two 
will receive less in quantity, but more in quality. Like this example, the lesser amount 
of  the  two  elders’  share  of  the  gold  of  the  truth  of  divine  immediacy,  which  was 
manifested  in  the  legacy  of  prophethood  and  the  establishment  of  its  laws,  would 
weigh  heavier  than  the  great  amount  of  divine  proximity  and  the  perfections  of 
sainthood  which  sprang  from  the  jewel  of  sainthood.  These  points  should  also  be 
taken  into  account  when  weighing  them  up.32  But  if  they  are  compared  with  one 
another  from  the  point  of  view  of  personal  courage,  knowledge,  and  sainthood,  the 
matter takes on a different complexion. 

                                                 

30 See, Bukhari, Fada’il Ashab, 6; Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 15-16; Tirmidhi, Ruya, 9. 
31 Batman: a weight varying from 5-30 lbs. [Tr.] 
32 See, Tirmidhi, Ruya, 10; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 8; Musnad, v, 44, 50. 

 

43

Also,  there  can be  no comparison in  respect of  the  collective personality  of the 
Prophet’s (UWBP) family, which was represented in the person of ‘Ali (May God be 
pleased with  him), and of the Muhammadan Truth, which was manifested as a total 
inheritance in that collective personality. For contained in it was the mighty mystery 
of the Prophet Muhammad himself (Upon whom be blessings and peace). 

As for the Caliphate Shi‘a, they can claim no rights before the Sunnis other than 
shame.  For  although  they  say  they  have  tremendous  love  for  ‘Ali  (May  God  be 
pleased with  him),  they  disparage  him,  and  their  creed  necessitates  accusing  him  of 
immorality.  For  they  say  that  although  Abu  Bakr  the  Veracious  and  ‘Umar  were 
acting  unjustly,  ‘Ali  feigned  approval  for  them;  according  to  Shi’i  terminology,  he 
dissimulated. That is, he was frightened of them and behaved hypocritically.33 But it 
is not love to hold that someone who was such a hero of Islam, won the title Lion of 
Allah,34  and  was  the  commander  and  guide  of  the  faithful,  was  simulating  love  for 
people he did not love out of fear and deception, and was feigning approval for them 
in fear for more than twenty years, and was following wrongdoers. ‘Ali (May God be 
pleased with him) would disclaim love that sort. 

Thus, the people of truth’s creed in no way disparages ‘Ali, nor levels accusations 
of immorality at him. It does not attribute cowardice where there was such remarkable 
courage,  but  says  that  if  ‘Ali  had  not  considered  the  Rightly-Guided  Caliphs  to  be 
right,  he  would not  have  recognized  them  for  a  minute,  nor  obeyed  them. It  means 
that since he thought them right and preferable, he made over his courage and striving 
to the way of justice.35 

I n  S h o r t :  Too much or too little of anything is not good. Moderation is the 
middle  way36  and  has  been  chosen  by  the  Sunnis.  But,  alas,  Kharijite  ideas  have 
infiltrated the Sunnis to an extent; so too addicts of politics and some atheists criticize 
‘Ali.  They  say,  God  forbid,  that  he  did  not  understand  politics  so  was  not  entirely 
worthy  of  the  Caliphate  and  could  not  govern,  and  because  of  these  unjust 
accusations, ‘Alawis feel affronted at the Sunnis. Whereas Sunnis hold no principles 
or  basic  beliefs  that  necessitate  such  ideas.  Indeed,  they  prove  the  opposite.  The 
Sunnis cannot  

                                                 

Sunna, vi, 320. 

33 See, al-Razi, I’tiqad Firaq al-Muslimin wa’l-Mushrikin, i, 60, 61; Ibn Taymiyya, Minhaj al-

34 See, Ahmad b. ‘Abdullah al-Tabari, al-Riyad al-Nadira, i, 245; Zaha’ir al-’Uqba, i, 92. 
35 Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, i, 130-2. 
36 See, al-Bayhaqi, Shu’ab al-Iman, iii, 402; v, 261; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 470. 

 

44

be  condemned  because  of  ideas  that  come  from  Kharijites  and  atheists.  Indeed,  the 
Sunnis  are  firmer  followers  of  ‘Ali  than  the  ‘Alawis.  They  mention  ‘Ali  in  the 
laudatory  fashion  he  deserves  in  all  their  khutbas  and  prayers.  And  the  saints  and 
purified scholars, the vast majority of whom belonged to the Sunni school, recognized 
him  as  a  spiritual  guide  and  the  king  of  sainthood.37  The  ‘Alawis  should  ignore  the 
Kharijites  and  atheists  who  have  deservedly  earned  the  enmity  of  both  the  ‘Alawis 
and  the  Sunnis,  and  not  take  sides  against  the  people  of  truth.  Some  ‘Alawis  even 
abandon the Prophet’s (UWBP) Sunna out of spite for the Sunnis. Anyway, we have 
said too much on this matter, for it  has been discussed inordinately by the religious 
scholars. 

O  Sunnis,  who  are  the  people  of  truth,  and  ‘Alawis,  whose  way  is  love  of  the 
Prophet’s (UWBP)  family! Quickly put an end to this meaningless, disloyal, unjust, 
and  harmful  dispute  between  you.  Otherwise  the  atheistic  current  which  is  now  so 
influential will make one of you a tool against the other, and use the one to crush the 
other. And after defeating the one it will destroy the tool. As believers in divine unity, 
it  is  essential that  you  leave  aside unimportant  matters  that  cause  division,  for  there 
are  a  hundred  fundamental  sacred  bonds  between  you  that  enjoin  brotherhood  and 
unity. 

Second Station 

 
The Second Station will be about the second truth of the verse, 

But if they turn away, say: “God suffices me, there is no god but He; in Him 
do  I  place  my  trust  –  He  the  Sustainer  of  the  Throne  [of  Glory] 
Supreme!”(9:129)38 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

37 See, Imam Rabbani, al-Maktubat, i, 134 (No: 251). 
38 The Second Station was designated the Eleventh Flash. 
*Note: Our Master, Hazret-i Ustad, said in explanation of these two phrases in the footnote of the 
Sixth Chapter of the Twenty-Ninth Flash, which is in Arabic: “The degrees of these two phrases were 
written in Arabic because they are reflection and remembrance of God rather than intellectual 
knowledge..... ” The Fourth Ray, called Hasbiye Risalesi, about the verse “For us God suffices, and he 
is the Best Disposer of Affairs,” was written subsequently in Turkish. 

 

45

 
 
 
The Fifth Flash 

 
 
A  treatise  was  to  be  written  that  would  explain  in  fifteen  degrees  a  highly 
significant meaning of the verse, “For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of 
Affairs,”(3:173)  but  it  has  been  postponed  for  now  since  it  would  have  been 
concerned more with reflective thought and the recollection of God than with reality 
and intellectual knowledge. In fact, the important treatise called The Stairway of the 
Practices  of  the  Prophet  and  Antidote  for  the  Sickness  of  Innovation  was originally 
known as the Fifth Flash, but since it comprised eleven points, it was designated the 
Eleventh Flash, and the Fifth Flash’s place remained unoccupied. 

*   *   * 

The Sixth Flash 

 
 
Again, there was to have been a treatise explaining in fifteen or twenty degrees of 
reflective  thought  the  important  truth  stated  in  numerous  verses  of  the  Qur’an  and 
expressed  by  the  phrase:  “There  is  no  power  and  strength  save  through  God,  the 
Exalted, the Mighty.”1,2 Like the Fifth Flash, this consisted of degrees I had perceived 
in myself and observed through reflection and remembrance of God in my journeying 
of  the  spirit.  Therefore,  since  it  was  more  a  means  to  illumination  and  spiritual 
pleasure than intellectual knowledge and reality, it seemed appropriate to include it at 
the end of the Flashes, which are about reality, rather than among them.  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

1 See, Bukhari, Tahajjud, 21; Nasa’i, Sahw, 83. 
2 See Note above. 

 

46

The Seventh Flash 

 
 

 

[This  is  about  the  seven  sorts  of  predictions  about  the  Unseen  at  the 
end of Sura al-Fath.] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Truly did God fulfil the vision for His Messenger: You shall enter the Sacred 
Mosque, if God wills,  with minds secure, heads shaved, hair cut short, and 
without fear. For He knew what you knew not, and He granted besides this, a 
victory soon to come. * It is He who sent His Messenger with guidance and 
the Religion of Truth, to proclaim it over all religion, and enough is God for 
a Witness. * Muhammad is the Messenger of God; and those  who are with 
him are strong against unbelievers, [but] compassionate among each other. 
You will see them bow and prostrate themselves  [in prayer], seeking grace 
from God and [His] good pleasure. On their faces are their marks, [being] 
the traces of their prostration. This is their similitude in the Torah; and their 
similitude  in  the  Gospel  is:  like  a  seed  which  sends  forth  its  blade,  then 
makes it strong; it then becomes thick, and it stands on its own stem, [filling] 
the sowers with wonder and delight. As a result, it fills the unbelievers with 
rage  at  them.  God  has  promised  those  among  them  who  believe  and  do 
righteous deeds forgiveness, and a great reward.(48:27-9) 

These  three  verses  from  Sura  al-Fath  contain  many  aspects  of  miraculousness. 
The Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition’s miraculousness has ten universal aspects; the 
aspect related to its giving news of the Unseen may be seen in seven or eight ways in 
these three verses. 
 
THE FIRST 

“Truly did God fulfil the vision for His Messenger” to the end of the verse, gave 
certain news of the conquest of Mecca before it happened. It occurred two years later 
just as predicted.1 

                                                 

1 Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabawiyya, v, 69; Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, ii, 139, 146. 

 

47

THE SECOND 

“And He granted besides this, a victory soon to come” is stating that although the 
Truce  of  Hudaybiya  was  apparently  opposed  to  Islam’s  interests  and  the  Quraysh 
were  victorious to  an  extent,  in  reality  it  was  a  great  victory  and  the  key to  further 
conquests.  For  with  the  Truce  the  physical  sword  was temporarily  hung  up, but  the 
flashing diamond sword of the Qur’an was unsheathed, and  it conquered minds and 
hearts. As a result of it, the two sides mixed with one another. The  virtues of Islam 
and  lights of  the  Qur’an  rent  the  veils  of  obduracy  and  tribalism and  prevailed.  For 
example, people like Khalid ibn al-Walid, a brilliant warrior, and ‘Amr ibn al-‘As, a 
brilliant politician, who could not accept defeat, were defeated by the Qur’anic sword 
manifested through the Truce of Hudaybiya.2 They submitted in perfect obedience to 
Islam in Medina, and Khalid became a “Sword of Allah;” a sword in the conquests of 
Islam. 

An  Important  Question:  What  was  the  reason  the  Companions  of  the  Noble 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace), the Glory of the World and Beloved 
of the Sustainer of All the Worlds, were defeated by the idolators at the end of Uhud 
and beginning of Hunayn?3 

The  Answer:  Among  the  idolators  were  many  persons  like  Khalid  who  in  the 
future would be equal to the leading Companions of that time. Therefore, so as not to 
degrade them entirely in the view of the future, which for them would be glorious and 
honourable,  divine  wisdom  gave  them  in  the  past  immediate  recompense  for  their 
future  good  works  and  did  not  completely  destroy  their  pride.  That  is  to  say,  the 
Companions  of  the  past  were  defeated by  the  Companions  of the  future,  so  that the 
future  Companions  would  enter  Islam,  not  through  fear  of  the  flashing  sword  but 
through zeal for the flash of truth, and so that they and their natural valour should not 
be brought low. 
 
THE THIRD 

The words, “and without fear” say this: “You shall circumambulate the Ka‘ba in 
complete  safety.”  However  at  that  time  the  majority  of  the  nomadic  peoples  of  the 
Arabian Peninsula  were  hostile, and most of the  environs of Mecca  and the tribe of 
Quraysh, enemies. By predicting: “Soon you shall circumambulate the Ka‘ba without 
fear,” it was indicating and  

                                                 

2 Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabawiyya, iv, 7; Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, iv, 252. 
3 See, Bukhari, Maghazi, 54; Jihad, 52, 61, 97, 167; Muslim, Jihad, 79; Tirmidhi, Jihad, 15. 

 

48

foretelling that the Arabian Peninsula would submit and all the Quraysh  enter Islam 
and total security be established. And it all occurred exactly as predicted.4 
 
THE FOURTH 

“He  it  is  who  sent  His  Messenger  with  guidance  and  the  Religion  of  Truth,  to 
proclaim it over all religion” predicts with complete certainty that the religion which 
the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  brought  would  triumph 
over all religions. However at that time Christianity, Judaism, and Zoroastrianism had 
hundreds  of  millions  of  adherents  and  were  the  official  religions  of  such  world-
dominant  states  as  Rome,  China,  and  Persia,  which  had  hundreds  of  millions  of 
subjects, and Muhammad the Arabian was unable to subdue his own small tribe even. 
Yet it is foretelling that the religion he brought would triumph over all religions and 
be  victorious  over  all  states.  And  it  does  this  most  clearly  and  categorically.  The 
future confirmed this prediction, with the sword of Islam extending from the Pacific 
Ocean in the east to the Atlantic Ocean in the west. 
 
THE FIFTH 

“Muhammad  is  the  Messenger  of  God,  and  those  who  are  with  him  are  strong 
against  unbelievers,  [but]  compassionate  among  each  other.  You  will  see  them  bow 
and  prostrate  themselves.”  The  beginning  of  this  verse  foretells  explicitly  the  lofty 
qualities and virtues that made the Companions the most elevated of humankind after 
the  prophets.  And  allusively  it  indicates  the  Rightly-Guided  Caliphs,  who  would 
succeed  to the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  position  after  his death  through the  institution  of 
the  Caliphate,  and  foretells  the  fine  attributes5  which  were  what  most  distinguished 
each of them and marked them out. It is as follows: 

“And  those  who  are  with  him”  alludes  to  Abu  Bakr  the  Veracious,  who  was 
distinguished by being  among  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP) special  followers  and  party  to 
his conversation, and again being included among his special followers by being the 
first  to  die.  While  “are  strong  against  the  unbelievers”  points  to  ‘Umar,  who  in  the 
future would cause the countries of the globe to tremble at his conquests, and with his 
justice would descend on tyrants like a thunderbolt. And “compassionate among each 
other”  gives  news  of  ‘Uthman,  who  in  the  future  when  the  most  serious  dissension 
was being fomented, would sacrifice his own life and spirit out of his perfect  

                                                 

4 Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabawiyya, v, 69; Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, ii, 139, 146. 
5 See, Ahmad b. Hanbal, Fada’il al-Sahaba, i, 434; Baghawi, Ma‘alim al-Tanzil, iv, 206. 

 

49

compassion  so  that  the  blood  of  Muslims  should  not  be  spilt;  he  preferred  to  be 
martyred  wrongfully  while  reading  the  Qur’an.  And  “You  will  see  them  bow  and 
prostrate  themselves  [in  prayer],  seeking  grace  from  God  and  [His]  good  pleasure” 
tells  that  with  his  complete  worthiness  to  undertake  the  Caliphate  and  government, 
and his heroism, and his choosing perfect asceticism, worship, poverty, and frugality, 
and whose bowing and prostrating in prayer was corroborated by everyone, ‘Ali (May 
God be pleased  with  him)  was  not  responsible  for  his  position  in  the  future  and the 
wars  and  strife  in  which  he  was  involved,  and  that  his  intention  and  wish  were  for 
divine favour. 
 
THE SIXTH 

The phrase, “This is their similitude in the Torah” makes predictions concerning 

the Unseen in two respects: 

T h e  F i r s t : It cites these qualities of the Companions that are mentioned in 
the Torah, which for an unlettered person like the Prophet (Upon whom be blessings 
and peace) belonged to the World of the Unseen. Yes, as described in the Nineteenth 
Letter,  the  Torah  contains  the  following  lines  about  the  Companions  of  the  Prophet 
who was to come at the end of time: “The banners of the holy ones are together with 
them.”6 That is, his Companions would be pious worshippers and righteous saints, so 
that  they  were  described  as  “the  holy  ones,”  that  is,  “sacred.”  The  Torah  has  been 
corrupted through translation into numerous languages, yet with many of its verses it 
still corroborates the words of Sura al-Fath, “This is their similitude in the Torah.” 

T h e  S e c o n d aspect of it giving news of the Unseen is this: with this phrase it 
is  predicting  that  the  Companions  and  the  generation  that  followed  them  would 
achieve  such  a  degree  of  worship  that  the  luminosity  of  their  spirits  would shine  in 
their  faces,  and  that  marks  would  be  apparent  on  their  foreheads,  like  a  stamp  of 
sainthood,  caused  by  their  repeated  prostrations.  And  indeed  the  future  proved  this 
brilliantly, with complete clarity and certainty. Many prominent persons caught up in 
that  strange  dissension  and  political  upheaval  demonstrated  the  mystery  of  “This  is 
their  similitude  in  the  Torah,”  who  day  and  night  performed  prayers  of  a  thousand 
rakats like Zayn al-‘Abidin, and performed the morning prayer with the ablutions of 
the previous evening, like Tavus al-Yamani.7 

                                                 

’Alamin, 113. 

6 Deuteronomy, 33:2; Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 218; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-

7 See, Ghazali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, i, 359; al-Dhahabi, Siyar A‘lam Nubala’, iv, 547. 

 

50

THE SEVENTH 

“And  their  similitude  in  the  Gospel  is:  like  a  seed  which  sends  forth  its  blade, 
then makes it strong; it then becomes thick, and it stands on its own stem, [filling] the 
sowers  with  wonder  and  delight.  As  a  result,  it  fills  the  unbelievers  with  rage  at 
them.” These phrases give news of the Unseen in two respects: 

T h e  F i r s t  is the prediction in the Gospel about the Companions, which for 

the unlettered Prophet (UWBP) belonged to the World of the Unseen. 

Yes,  the  Gospels  contain  such  verses  as,  “With  him  is  a  staff  of  iron,  and  his 
community is like him”8 describing the Prophet who was to come at the end of time. 
That is, a Prophet would come who unlike Jesus (UWP) would wield the sword and 
be charged with waging jihad, as would his Companions. The one bearing “the staff 
of iron” would be the World’s Ruler. For in another place  in the Gospels it  says:  “I 
am  going  so  that  the  Ruler  of  the  World  may  come.”9  That  is  to  say,  the  World’s 
Ruler will come. It is thus understood from these two verses in the Gospels that at the 
outset the Companions would be few and weak, nevertheless they would sprout like 
seeds,  grow,  thicken,  and  find  strength.  Then  when  about  to  be  overwhelmed  and 
smothered  by  the  rage  this  caused  the  unbelievers,  they  would  subjugate  mankind 
with their swords and prove that the Messenger (UWBP), their leader, was the Ruler 
of the World. These verses express exactly the meaning of the above verses of Sura 
al-Fath. 

S e c o n d  A s p e c t : The verses predict the following: due to their weakness 
and small number the Companions accepted the Pact of Hudaybiya, but within a short 
time they grew and acquired such strength and loftiness that, planted by the Hand of 
Power in the field of the face of the earth, they multiplied in most elevated, powerful, 
fruitful, and plentiful fashion. This was true in comparison with the shoots of mankind 
at  that  time,  since  these  latter  were  short,  weak,  defective,  and  scant  due  to neglect 
and  heedlessness.  The  Companions  would  grow  strong  causing 
illustrious 
governments  to  rage  at  them  in  envy,  jealousy,  and  anger.  The  future  verified  this 
prediction in most brilliant fashion. 

The prediction also make the following further slight hint: it indicates through the 
word “forgiveness” that, although while praising the Companions’ excellent qualities 
they should have been promised the greatest rewards, in the future they would commit 
serious errors due to strife. For  

                                                 

8 Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 99, 114. 
9 John, 16:7; Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 214. 

 

51

forgiveness indicates the existence of faults. At that time it would be forgiveness, the 
greatest  bounty,  that  the  Companions  would  want.  The  highest  reward  would  be 
absence  of  punishment,  thanks  to  forgiveness.  The  word  “forgiveness”  both  makes 
this  subtle  allusion,  and  it  is  connected  with  the  verse at  the  beginning of  the  Sura, 
“That  God  may  forgive  you  your  faults  of  the  past  and  those  to  follow.”(48:2)  By 
giving the good news of forgiveness at the start of the Sura not for true sins, since the 
Messenger  (UWBP)  was  exempt  from  sin  and  did  not  commit  them,  but  for  a 
meaning  in  keeping  with  the  rank of  prophethood,  and  by  giving the  good news  of 
forgiveness for the Companions at the end of the Sura, it adds a further subtlety to the 
allusion. 

Of  the  ten  aspects  of  miraculousness  contained  in  the  above-mentioned  three 
verses at the end of Sura al-Fath, we have discussed here only the aspect concerning 
predictions about the Unseen, and of the numerous parts of that aspect, only seven. A 
flash of miraculousness in the positioning of the letters of the last verse is alluded to 
at  the  end  of  the  Twenty-Sixth  Word,  which  is  about divine  determining  and  man’s 
faculty of will. This last verse looks to the Companions both with its sentences, and to 
their situations with  its phrases, and it describes their attributes with  its words10 and 
letters;  so  too  with  the  repetition  of  the  number  of  letters  it  alludes  to  classes  of 
famous Companions like the Companions of Badr, of Uhud, of Hunayn, of the Bench, 
and of Ridwan. Moreover, it expresses many further mysteries through ‘coincidences’ 
and abjad reckoning, which are branches of the science of jafr and keys to it. 

 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

10 See, Ahmad b. Hanbal, Fada’il al-Sahaba, i, 434; Ibn al-Jawzi, Zad al-Masir, vii, 446; Suyuti, 
al-Durr al-Manthur, vii, 544; Alusi, Ruh al-Ma’ani, xxvi, 129; Baghawi, Ma‘alim al-Tanzil, iv, 206. 

 

52

[Predictions  similar  to  these  concerning  the  Unseen  indicated  by  the 
allusive  meanings  of  the  verses  at  the  end  of  Sura  al-Fath  will  be 
discussed here briefly, also in connection with their allusive meanings.] 

 

 

A Postscript 

And We should have shown them the Straight Way. * All who obey God and 
the Messenger are in the company of those on whom is the grace of God – of 
the Prophets, the Veracious, the Witnesses [or Martyrs], and the Righteous: 
And how goodly a company are these!(4:68-9) 

We shall point out two of the thousands of fine points expounding these verses. 

 
FIRST POINT 

Just as the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition expresses truths through its explicit, 
clear meanings and senses, so it expresses many allusive meanings through its styles 
and manner of exposition. Each of its  verses contains  numerous levels of meanings. 
The Qur’an proceeds from all-encompassing  knowledge, so all  its meanings may be 
intended. Its meanings are not restricted to one or two like man’s speech, the product 
of his limited mind and individual will. 

In consequence of this, innumerable truths contained in the Qur’an’s verses have 
been  expounded by  Qur’anic  commentators,  and there  are  many  more  that  have  not 
been  expounded  by  them.  In  addition  to  its  explicit  meanings,  much  significant 
knowledge is contained in its letters in particular and in its allusions. 
 
SECOND POINT 

With the terms, “of the Prophets, the Veracious, the Witnesses [or martyrs], and 
the Righteous: And how goodly a company are these!”, the verse describes the people 
of the Straight Path and the groups of the Prophets, the caravan of the Veracious, the 
community  of  the  Martyrs,  the  class  of  the  Righteous,  and  those  who  follow  them. 
These  are  the  members  of  mankind  who  truly  receive  the  divine  bounties. 
Furthermore, having  indicated explicitly the most perfect of those five  groups in the 
world of Islam, it  indicates their  leaders and chiefs by mentioning their well-known 
attributes. In addi 

 

53

tion, with a flash of miraculousness giving news of the Unseen, it specifies one aspect 
those chiefs’ positions in the future. 

Yes,  “of  the  Prophets”  looks  explicitly  to  the  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace),  and  the  phrase  “the  Veracious”  looks  to  Abu  Bakr  the 
Veracious. It also indicates that he would be second after the Messenger (Upon whom 
be blessings and peace) and first to succeed him, and be known by the special title of 
Veracious  and  be  seen  at  the  head  of  all  honest  and  upright  people.  Then  “the 
Witnesses  [or  Martyrs]”  refers  to  ‘Umar,  ‘Uthman,  and  ‘Ali  (May  God  be  pleased 
with  all  of  them)  together.  It  intimates  that  the  three  of  them  would  succeed  to  the 
Caliphate after the Veracious One, and that the three of them would be martyred and 
the merits of martyrdom added to their other virtues. 

“The  Righteous”  alludes  to  distinguished  persons  like  the  Companions  of  the 
Bench, and of Badr and Ridwan. While with its explicit meaning, “And how goodly a 
company are these!” encourages others to follow them, and with its implicit meaning, 
by  showing  the  generation  that  succeeded  them  to  be  honoured  and  illustrious,  it 
alludes to Hasan (May God be pleased with him), who as the fifth Caliph affirmed the 
Hadith  “After  me  the  Caliphate  will  last  thirty  years”1  –  in  order  to  show  its  great 
value despite its brief duration. 

I n  S h o r t : Similarly to the verses at the end of Sura al-Fath, which look to the 
four Rightly-Guided Caliphs, affirming them, these verses look in part and allusively 
to their future positions in a way that gives news of the Unseen. Flashes of this sort of 
miraculousness,  the  disclosing  of  facts  about  the  Unseen,  which  is  one  sort  of  the 
Qur’an’s  miraculousness,  are  so  numerous  as  to  be  incalculable.  Literalist  scholars 
limit them to forty or fifty verses because of their superficial view, but in reality they 
number  more  than  a  thousand.  Sometimes  a  single  verse  has  four  or  five  aspects 
giving news of the Unseen. 

O our Sustainer! Do not take us to task if we forget or do wrong.(2:286) 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

1 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, iii, 509; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, al-Tamhid, viii, 67. See also, Tirmidhi, 

Fitan, 48; Musnad v, 220. 221; al-‘Albani, Sahih Jami‘ al-Saghir, no: 3336. 

 

54

A Second Explanation 
of the Above Postscript1
 

 
In addition to corroborating the predictions about the Unseen at the end of Sura 
al-Fath, the verse, “All … are in the company of those on whom is the grace of God – 
of  the  Prophets,  the  Veracious,  the  Witnesses,  and  the  Righteous:  how  goodly  a 
company are these!”(4:69) elucidates what is meant by the people of the Straight Path 
and  the  verse  “the  path  of  those  whom  you  have  blessed”(1:7)  and  describes  the 
luminous,  large,  familiar,  attractive  caravan  travelling  the  lengthy  road  leading  to 
eternity.  It  vigorously  urges  the  believers  and  the  intelligent  to  join,  follow,  and 
accompany it. In addition to its explicit meaning, like the verses at the end of Sura al-
Fath, this verse indicates through allusive and figurative meanings – called in rhetoric 
ma’arid al-kalam2 and mustatba’at al-tarakib3 – the four Rightly-Guided Caliphs and 
Hasan (May God be pleased with him), the fifth Caliph. It gives news of the Unseen 
in several respects, as follows: 

Just as the above verse states through its explicit meaning that the caravan of the 
Prophets, the  group of the  Veracious, the community of the Martyrs  and Witnesses, 
the  category  of  the  Righteous,  and  the  class  of  the  generation  following  the 
Companions  are  the  people  of  the  Straight  Path  and  those  among  mankind  who 
receive elevated divine bounties, and are ‘the doers of good;’ so too it indicates in a 
manner  predicting  the  Unseen  that  the  best  and  most  excellent  of  those  groups  are 
found in the World of Islam, like this: it points to the heirs of the Prophets who follow 
on in  succession  through  the  mystery  of  the  legacy  of the  Messenger  of  the  End  of 
Time’s  (UWBP)  prophethood,  and  to  the  caravan  of  the  Veracious  who  follow  on 
from  the  source of  veracity  of  the Strictly  Veracious  One, and  to the  convoy  of the 
Martyrs,  who  are  bound  through  the  rank  of  martyrdom  to  three  of  the  Rightly-
Guided Caliphs, and to the community of the Righteous, who are tied to it through the 
mystery  of  “And  those  who  believe  and  do  good  works,”(2:82,  etc.)  and  to  the 
categories of the generation following  

                                                 

of them would have been sufficient. 

1 My brothers have written down both explanations, since they found them useful. Otherwise one 

2 See, Ibn Manzur, Lisan al-’Arab, vii, 183; Qurtubi, al-Jami‘ bi-Ahkam al-Qur’an, x, 191, 199. 
3 See, Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, i, 406; al-Munawi, al-Ta‘arif, i, 32, 55; al-Hamawi, al-Adhanat al-

Adab, ii, 194. 

 

55

the  Companions,  who  represented  the  mystery  of “Say:  If  you  do  love  God,  follow 
me:  God  will  love  you  and  forgive  you  your  sins;  for  God  is  Oft-Forgiving,  Most 
Merciful”(3:31) and were in the company of the Companions and the Rightly-Guided 
Caliphs. So too, through its allusive meaning, it gives news through the epithet “and 
the Veracious” that Abu Bakr the Veracious would succeed to the Noble Messenger’s 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) position after him, and would be Caliph, famous 
among the Muslim community with the title Strictly Veracious, and be the chief of the 
caravan of “the Veracious.” With the phrase “the Martyrs” it foretells the martyrdom 
of three of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs, and that after the Veracious there would three 
martyr  Caliphs.  Because  “Martyrs  (Shuhada’)”  is  plural  and  the  lowest  number  [in 
Arabic grammar] of the plural is three. That means, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, and ‘Ali (May 
God  be  pleased  with  them)  would  lead  Islam  after  the  Veracious  One  and  would 
suffer martyrdom. And it occurred exactly as predicted. 

Also,  it  is  giving  news  through  the  phrase  “the  Righteous”  that  people  like  the 
People  of  the  Bench  who  performed  good  works,  acts  of  worship,  and  feared  God, 
and are commended in the Torah, would be numerous in the future. While the phrase 
“How  goodly  a  company  are  these!”  praises  the  generation  that  followed  the 
Companions and accompanied them  in  learning and good works. And in addition to 
showing  that  to  accompany  those  four  groups  on  the  road  to  eternity  is  good  and 
commendable,  it  indicates the  importance  of  Hasan’s  brief  period  as  Caliph,  as  was 
confirmed by the Messenger’s (UWBP) prophecies: “The Caliphate after me will last 
thirty  years,”4 and, “This my  grandson  Hasan  is  master of men, by means of whom 
God will reconcile two great groups,”5 thus quelling dispute and conflict. In this way 
it  indicates  that  Hasan  would  be  a  fifth  Caliph  succeeding  the  four  Rightly-Guided 
Caliphs. While through a device called in rhetoric mustatba^a\t al-tara\kêb, it alludes 
to  the  fifth  Caliph’s  name  with  the  phrase  “How  goodly  (hasuna)  a  company  are 
these!” 

There  are  many  further  mysteries  like  these  allusive  predictions,  but  since  they 
are outside our purpose, that door has not been answered for now. Numerous verses 
of  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  give  news  of  the  Unseen  in  many  respects.  This  sort of the 
Qur’an’s predictions about the Unseen number thousands. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

4 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, iii, 509; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, al-Tamhid, viii, 67. See also, Tirmidhi, 

Fitan, 48; Musnad, v, 220, 221; al-‘Albani, Sahih Jami‘ al-Saghir, no: 3336. 

5 Bukhari, Fitan, 20; Sulh, 9, Fada’il Ashab al-Nabi, 22, Manaqib, 25; Darimi, Sunna, 12; 

Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 25; Nasa’i, Jum‘a, 27; Musnad, v, 38, 44, 49, 51. 

 

56

Conclusion 

 
 
A  miraculous,  subtle  point  of  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  that  is  manifested  through 

‘coincidences’1 is as follows: 

In  the  All-Wise  Qur’an,  the  divine  names  of  Allah,  Merciful  (Rahman), 
Compassionate  (Rahim),  Sustainer  (Rabb),  and  He  (Hu)  in  place  of  Allah,  are 
mentioned  approximately  four  thousand  times  in  all.  The  second  type  of  abjad, 
reckoned  according  to  the  arrangement  of  the  alphabet,  makes  the  value  of  “In  the 
Name  of  God,  the  Merciful,  the  Compassionate”  around  four  thousand  also.  Small 
fractions of large numbers do not spoil ‘coincidence’, so have been disregarded. Also, 
together  with  the  two  conjunctival  waw’s  within  “Alif.  Lam.  Mim.”,  it  makes 
approximately  two  hundred  and  eighty.  In  addition  to  coinciding  with  both  the 
approximately two hundred and eighty instances of the word Allah in Sura al-Baqara, 
and  the  around  two  hundred  and  eighty  verses  of  the  Sura,  if  reckoned  with  the 
second  sort of abjad  reckoning,  it  again  makes  about  four  thousand.  That  coincides 
both  with  the  five  famous  divine  names  mentioned  above,  and  if  the  fractions  are 
disregarded,  with  the  numerical  value  of  “In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Merciful,  the 
Compassionate.”  That  is  to  say,  according  to  this  mystery  of  ‘coincidence,’  “Alif. 
Lam. Mim.” is both a title denoting the One it signifies, and a name for al-Baqara, and 
a name of the Qur’an, and a concise  index of both of them, and a sample, summary 
and  seed  of  both,  and  a  summary  of  “In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Merciful,  the 
Compassionate.”  

According to the well-known Abjad system, “In the Name of God, the Merciful, 
the Compassionate” is equal in numerical value to the name of Sustainer. Similarly, if 
the  doubled  Ra  in  “the  Merciful,  the  Compassionate  (ar-Rahman,  ar-Rahim)”  is 
counted twice, it becomes nine hundred and ninety and a key to numerous important 
mysteries – with its nineteen letters, the key to nineteen thousand worlds. 

Among the subtle ‘coincidences’ of the word Allah in the Qur’an of Miraculous 

Exposition is that in the whole Qur’an eighty instances of the  

                                                 

several pages. (Tr.) 

1 ‘Coincidence’ (tevâfuk): the correspondence of letters or words in lines or patterns on one or 

 

57

word at the beginning of the bottom line of pages correspond to each other in patterns. 
So too do eighty instances of the name at the end of the bottom line look to each other 
in the same way. And again fifty-five instances of the word Allah right in the centre 
of  the  bottom  line  fall  one  on  top  of  the  other,  uniting  as  though  to  make  a  single 
instance of the  name. At the start of the last line a single and sometimes three-letter 
word numbers, with gaps, twenty-five, thus when added to the coinciding fifty-five at 
the middle of the lines, makes a ‘coincidence’ of eighty; this makes a coincidence of 
eighty  both  at  the  beginning  of  the  line  and  at  the  end.  Could  such  a  subtle,  fine, 
orderly, symmetrical, miraculous ‘coincidence’ be without wisdom or subtlety? God 
forbid,  such  a  thing  could  not  be!  Most  certainly,  significant  treasuries  could  be 
opened up with the tip of these coincidences. 

 
O our Sustainer! Do not take us to task if we forget or do wrong.(2:282) 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

 
                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i 
 
 
 
 
 

*   *   * 
 
 
 
 
The Eighth Flash 

 
 
This  has  been  published  in  printed  editions  of  Sikke-i  Tasdik-i  Gaybî  (The 
Ratifying  Stamp  of  the  Unseen),  and  in  hand-duplicated  copies  of  The  Flashes 
Collection.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

58

The Ninth Flash 

[Not  everyone  should  read  this  Flash,  for  some  people  will  not 
discern the subtle errors of the Unity of Existence, and are not in need 
of it.] 

In His Name! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

 
 
My Dear, Loyal, Sincere, Conscientious Brother! 
The reason I did not write a separate letter to my brother Abdülmecid,1 was that I 
considered the letters I had written to you to be sufficient. After Hulûsî,2 Abdülmecid 
is a valuable brother for me and a student. Every morning and evening he is present in 
name  in  my  prayers  together  with  Hulûsî,  sometimes  being  mentioned  first.  First 
Sabri,3  then  Hakkı  Efendi4  profit  from  the  letters  I  write  you.  I  do  not  write  them 
separate  letters  either.  Almighty  God  made  you  a  blessed  elder  brother  to  them. 
Correspond  with  Abdülmecid  in  my  place;  he  should  not  worry,  for  after  Hulûsî,  I 
think of him. 

                                                 

1 Abdülmecid (‘Abd al-Majid) was Bediuzzaman’s younger brother. He was a teacher of the 
religious sciences, then a Mufti, and translated parts of the Risale-i Nur into Arabic, and Isharat al-
I‘jaz and Mesnevi-i Nuriye from Arabic into Turkish. He died in 1967. (Tr.) 

2 Hulûsi Yahyagil was one of the first students of the Risale-i Nur, and was from Elazığ in eastern 
Turkey. When serving as a captain in the army in 1929 he visited Bediuzzaman, and in Bediuzzaman’s 
words, “his zeal and seriousness were the most important reason for the last of the Words (Sözler) and 
the Letters (Mektûbat) being written.” (Tr.) 

3 Sabri Arseven. Known as Santral Sabri, he was one of Bediuzzaman’s most important students 

in Barla and was also imam of the neighbouring village of Bedre. He died in 1954. (Tr.) 

4 Hakkı Tığlı. He was from Eğridir and was imprisoned together with Bediuzzaman in Eskişehir 

in 1935. He also acted as Bediuzzaman’s lawyer. (Tr.) 

 

59

YOUR FIRST QUESTION 

You ask a confidential question about one of your forebears signing himself, “al-
Sayyid Muhammad.” My brother, it isn’t possible for me to give a scholarly answer to 
this or to research into it. However, I told my companions: “Hulûsi resembles neither 
the present-day Turks, nor the Kurds. I see other qualities in him.” They agreed with 
this.  We  said  in  accordance  with  the  saying,  “No  talent  is  needed  to  receive  God’s 
gifts,”  the  nobility  observed  in  Hulûsi  is  a  divine  gift.  Also,  as  you  know,  God’s 
Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  has  two  families.  One 
consists of his descendants, and the other is the family of his prophethood’s luminous 
collective  personality.  You  certainly  belong  to  the  latter,  and  I  am  of  the  opinion, 
though unsubstantiated, that in respect of his first family,  your forefather’s signature 
was not without reason. 
My Dear Brother! 

 
A SUMMARY OF YOUR SECOND QUESTION 

Muhyiddin  al-‘Arabi5  said:  “The  spirit’s  createdness  consists  of  its  unfolding.” 
With  this  question  you  are  compelling  a  powerless  wretch  like  me  to  contest  an 
awesomely  brilliant  scholar  of  reality  and  genius  of  the  occult  sciences  like 
Muhyiddin al-‘Arabi. However, relying on the teachings of the Qur’an I can attempt 
the discussion; even if I am only a fly, I can fly higher than that eagle. 

My  brother!  You  should  understand  that  Muhyiddin  would  not  deceive,  but  he 
could  be  deceived.  He  was  rightly-guided,  but  could  not  act  as  a  guide  in  all  his 
works.  What  he  saw  was  correct, but  it was  not  reality.  The  reality  of  man’s  spirit, 
about which you ask, is explained in the Twenty-Ninth Word, the discussion about the 
spirit. 

Yes,  in  respect  of  its  nature,  the  spirit  is  a  law  proceeding  from  the  divine 
command, but it is a living law clothed in external existence  and possessing external 
existence. Muhyiddin thought of it only from the point of view of its essential nature. 
His way of the Unity of Existence considers the existence of things to be imaginary. 
He  had  wondrous  visions  and  unveiled  the  realities,  but  since  he  had  chosen  an 
independent  way,  he  was  compelled  to  apply,  artificially  and  with  forced 
interpretations, certain Qur’anic verses to his way and observations, thus marring the 
clarity of the  

                                                 

5 Muhyi al-Din ibn al-’Arabi, an eminent scholar and thinker who profoundly influenced the 

development of Sufism. He was born in Andalusia in 560 A. H. and died in Damascus in 638 A. H. 
Among his best known works are Fusus al-Hikam and al-Futuhat al-Makkiya. 

 

60

verses. In others of his treatises he expounds the straight highway of the Qur’an and 
of the Sunnis. He was a holy man who held a position all his own, and he was one of 
the  well-accepted,  but  he  exceeded  the  mark  in  his  unbalanced  disclosures  and  in 
many matters opposed the majority of the learned authorities. 

It is because of this that although he was such an elevated and wondrous spiritual 
pole, unequalled down the ages, it is as though his particular way was very short and 
restricted to Sadruddin al-Qunawi.6 His works are only rarely benefited from by those 
on the straight path. Many of the authoritive scholars do not encourage study of those 
valuable works and some of them even prevent it.  

Lengthy  study  and  a  very  lofty,  broad  view  is  needed  to  show  the  fundamental 
differences  together  with  their  sources  between  Muhyiddin’s  way  and  that  of  the 
exacting  scholars.  Yes,  the  differences  are  so  fine  and profound  and  the  sources, so 
elevated and extensive that Muhyiddin has not been censured and has continued to be 
accepted. For if in regard to thought, scholarship, and illumination the difference and 
sources had  become  apparent, it  would  have  been  very  humiliating  for  him,  and  he 
would have been seen to be in serious error. Since the difference is so profound, we 
shall  try  to  show  it  and  the  sources  briefly  by  means  of  a  comparison,  and 
Muhyiddin’s errors in the matter. 

For example, the sun appears in a mirror. The mirror both contains the sun and is 
qualified by  it. That is to say,  in one respect the  sun is present  in the mirror, and in 
another it adorns the mirror, becoming a brilliant colour, attribute and quality of it. If 
the mirror had been a camera,  it would have  fixed the sun’s image on photographic 
paper.  In  these  cases,  the  sun  in  the  mirror,  and  its  semblance  on  the  photographic 
paper, and its aspect that adorns the mirror and becomes like a quality of the mirror, 
are other than the actual sun. They are not the sun, but the sun’s manifestation which 
has taken  on  another  existence.  As for  the  existence  of the  sun  that  is  visible  in  the 
mirror, even if it is not identical with the sun that is visible outside, since it is tied to it 
and points to it, it is supposed to have the same existence. 

In consequence of this, it may be said: “There is nothing apart from the actual sun 
in  the  mirror,”  meaning  that  the  mirror  contains  it  and  intending  the  sun’s  external 
existence in the mirror. But if it is said that the sun’s extended reflection, which has 
become like an attribute or quality  

                                                 

6 Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi (1209-74). One of Ibn al-‘Arabi’s foremost students, he wrote a number 

of works on Sufism, among which is al-Nusus fi Tahqiq al-Tawr al-Makhsus. 

 

61

of the mirror, and its  image which  has been transposed to the photographic paper is 
the sun, it is wrong; it is an error to say: “There is nothing in them other than the sun.” 
For  there  is  the reflection  on  the  mirror’s  shining  face  and  the  image  formed on  its 
back, and these have their own separate existences. For sure those existences are from 
the  sun’s manifestation,  but they  are  not the  sun.  The  human  mind  and  imagination 
resemble this example of the mirror, as follows: 

The information in the mirror of man’s thought also has two faces: in one respect 
it  is  knowledge,  in  another, it  is  known.  If  we  suppose  the mind  to  contain  what  is 
known, then the known thing becomes something known by the mind; its existence is 
something different to the mind. If we suppose the mind to be qualified by the thing, 
it becomes an attribute or quality of the mind; then the thing becomes knowledge and 
has  an  external  existence.  Even  if  the  existence  of  the  thing  known  is  essential 
(jawhari), it has an accidental external existence like the knowledge. 

Thus,  according  to  these  two  comparisons,  the  universe  is  a  mirror.  The  true 
nature  of  beings  is  also mirror-like;  they  are subject  to divine  creation  through  pre-
eternal power. In one respect, each being is a sort of mirror to one of the names of the 
Pre-Eternal  Sun,  displaying  its  embroideries.  The  followers  of  Muhyiddin’s  way 
unveiled them only in respect of being mirrors and containers, revealing the similitude 
of  their  existence  in  the  mirror,  from  the  point  of  view  of  denial.  Supposing  the 
reflection  to be  identical  with  the  thing  reflected,  they did not  think  of  other  levels. 
They said: “There is no existent but He,” and were in error. They almost went as far 
as denying the fundamental rule: “The reality of beings is constant.”  

As for the people of reality, they have seen through the mystery of the legacy of 
prophethood  and  the  definite  statements  of  the  Qur’an  that  the  embroideries  and 
inscriptions  that  come  into  being  in  the  mirrors of  things  through  divine  power  and 
will are His works. They are “all from Him;” they are not “all Him.”7 Things have an 
existence and their existence is constant to a degree. For sure it is weak compared to 
that  of  the  Necessary  Existence,  like  an  illusion  or  imagining,  but  through  the  Pre-
Eternal All-Powerful One’s creation, will, and power, it exists. 

In  the  comparison,  the  sun  in  the  mirror  has  an  existence  through  its  similitude 
apart from its external existence. And its expanded reflection also, which gives colour 
to and adorns the mirror, has an accidental and separate external existence. And the 
sun’s image which is depicted on the  

                                                 

said “There is no existent save Him.” 

7 That is, everything is from Him; He creates everything. Not everything is Him so that it may be 

 

62

photographic  paper  on  the  back  of  the  mirror  also  has  a  separate  and  accidental 
external existence.  

Similarly, the inscriptions of beings, which appear through the manifestations of 
the sacred divine names – occurring through will, choice, and power – in the mirror of 
the  universe  and  mirrors  of  the  quintessential  natures  of  things,  have  a  created 
existence separate from the Necessary Existence. And this existence has been given a 
permanence through pre-eternal power. But if the connection were to be severed, all 
things would at once cease to be. Because for their continued existence, all things are 
every  instant  in  need  of  their  Creator’s  preserving  them.  “The  reality  of  things  is 
constant,” but it is constant and permanent only through His making it so. 

Thus, Muhyiddin’s  saying: “Spirit  is  not created; it  is a reality proceeding  from 
the world of the divine command and from the attribute of will,” is contrary to many 
clear statements of the Qur’an and Hadiths, and according to the investigation above, 
he was confused, deceived, and had not seen the weak existences of things. 

The places of manifestation of such divine names as Creator and Provider cannot 
be illusory or imaginary. Since the names have a reality, their places of manifestation 
also have an external reality. 
 
YOUR THIRD QUESTION 

You want instruction in the science of jafr that will be a key to it. 
T h e  A n s w e r : We are not carrying out this work and service at our own wish 
and through our own planning. A better will than ours governs it, over and above our 
wills. The science of jafr is an absorbing and pleasurable occupation, but it busies us 
and detains us from our true duties. It has often happened that some of the Qur’an’s 
mysteries  have  been revealed  through  it  as  though  it  were  a  key,  but on  addressing 
myself  to  them  with  real  enthusiasm  and  enjoyment,  they  eluded  me.  I  have 
discovered two instances of wisdom in this:  

The  First:  It  may  be  discourteous  towards  the  prohibition  of  “None  knows  the 

Unseen save God.” 

The  Second:  Teaching  the  Islamic  community  about  the  fundamental  truths  of 
belief and the certain proofs of the Qur’an is a sacred service far exceeding in value 
and  merit  such  occult  sciences  as  jafr.  Their  firm  evidences  and  categorical  proofs 
allow no opportunity for exploitation, but occult sciences like jafr that are not bound 
by any firm rules, and are open to abuse and exploitation by charlatans. In any event, 
a little is bestowed whenever the need arises in this service of reality arises. 
Among the keys of jafr, the easiest, and perhaps the purest and finest,  

 

63

are  the  various  sorts  of  ‘coincidences.’  These  proceed  from  the  divine  name  of 
Originator (Bedi’) and have been manifested in the name of Allah in the Qur’an and 
adorn  the  works  we  have  published.  They  have  been  pointed  out  to  an  extent  in 
several places in the work Kerâmet-i Gavsiye (The Wonders of al-Gawth al-A‘zam). 
For  instance,  the  ‘coincidences’  showing  something  in  several  aspects  constitutes  a 
sign that has the strength of a proof. Sometimes with a number of deductions, a single 
‘coincidence’ may form a proof. However, this is enough for now. If there is serious 
need, it will be made known to you. 
 
YOUR FOURTH QUESTION 

That  is,  not  your  question  but  Imam  Ömer  Efendi’s,  about  a  wretched  doctor 
saying that Jesus (UWP) had a father.8 With a lunatic interpretation, the doctor tried 
to show that a Qur’anic verse justifies his saying this. 

At  one  time,  the  unfortunate  man  was  trying  to  create  something  with  the 
Disjointed  Letters.  He  was  working  at  it  feverishly.  Then  I  understood  that  he  had 
perceived  from  the  atheists’  attitude  that  they  were  going  to  attempt  to  abolish  the 
Islamic script. He was struggling pointlessly as though to save the script in the face of 
that flood. Now in this matter, and in the Second Matter, he saw the atheists’ terrible 
attacks  against  the  fundamentals  of  Islam, and  I  reckon  he  wanted  to  find  a  way  of 
compromising  through  meaningless  interpretations  like  that.  Since  definite  verses 
like,  

The similitude of Jesus before God is as that of Adam,(3:59)  

state that Jesus (Upon whom be peace) had no father, no importance should be given 
to  what  those  who  attempt  to  change  such  certain,  veritable  facts  say  with  their 
idiotic,  forced  interpretations.  For they  suppose  it  impossible  that  the  law  of  human 
reproduction  be  broken.  But  there  is  no  law  that  has  no  exceptions  and  to  which 
individuals  have  not  been  subject.  And  there  is  no  universal  rule  that  has  not  been 
breached by extraordinary individuals. 

Since  the  time  of  Adam  there  has  been  no  law  to  which  there  have  been  no 

individual exceptions. Firstly, the law of reproduction was violated in  

                                                 

8 The extraordinary achievements of an extraordinary human being who is the leader of a quarter 
of mankind, transformed humankind into angels of a sort, and left this world to make the heavens his 
dwelling – these extraordinary achievements demand an extraordinary form of the law of reproduction. 
For him to have been subject to that law in a dubious, unknown, unnatural, and even base way would 
have been inappropriate for him; anyway there was no need for him to have been. Moreover, the 
Qur’an’s explicit statements do not bear interpretation. How can the law of the angels’ sexuality, which 
is outside reproduction and in no way can be broken for the sake of repairing the law of human 
reproduction, which has been broken in a hundred ways – how can this law – together with such 
powerful laws as the law of the explicit verses of the Qur’an be violated? 

 

64

regard  to  origins  by  the  origins  of  the  two  hundred  thousand  animal  species,  and 
brought to an end. That is, the two hundred thousand progenitors of the species, quite 
simply like Adam’s, violated the law of reproduction. They were not born of a father 
and mother and were given existence outside the law. 

Furthermore,  the  greater  part  –  innumerable  individuals  –  of  the  hundred 
thousand species  we see with our eyes  every  spring are created outside that  law, on 
the  surface of leaves  and on putrified matter. So you can see  just  how unreasonable 
someone is who cannot accept with his reason the exception of a single individual in 
one thousand nine hundred years to a law that was violated and breached at its origin 
and  has  been  breached  every  year  even,  and  clings  to  forced  interpretations  of  the 
definite statements of the Qur’an. 

The  things  those  wretches  call  natural  laws  are  the  laws  called  ‘adat  Allah  or 
divine  practices,  which  are  a  universal  manifestation  of  the  divine  command  and 
dominical will, and which Almighty God changes for certain instances of wisdom. He 
shows  that  His  will  and  choice  govern  in  everything  and  in  every  law.  Certain 
extraordinary  individuals  breach  those  practices.  This  truth  He  points  out  with  His 
decree, “The similitude of Jesus before God is as that of Adam.”(3:59) 

Ömer Efendi’s S e c o n d  Q u e s t i o n concerning the doctor: 
The doctor behaves extremely foolishly in this matter, so that to listen to what he 
says or give it  importance is very demeaning. The unfortunate wants to be half way 
between belief and unbelief. I say the following, in reply not to his trifling words, but 
to Ömer Efendi’s questioning: 

The  reason  for  the  injunctions  and  prohibitions  of  the  Shari‘a  are  the  divine 
command  and  divine  prohibition.  Advantages  and  instances  of  wisdom  are  to  give 
them weight, and may be the reason for the command or prohibition from the point of 
view of the divine name of All-Wise. 

For example, someone making a journey shortens the five daily prayers. There is 
a reason for (illet) and a purpose or instance of wisdom in (hikmet) shortening them. 
The reason is the journey, while the purpose is the difficulty involved. If on a journey 
and there is no difficulty involved, the prayers are still shortened. If not on a journey, 
and the person suffers a hundred difficulties in his own house, he may not shorten the 
prayers. For the difficulty occurring on some journeys is sufficient as the purpose for 
shortening the prayers, and is again sufficient for making the journey the reason. 

Thus, in accordance with this rule of the Shari‘a, the Shari‘a’s injunctions do not 
change due to purposes or instances of wisdom; they look to the true reasons. Apart 
from the harm and illness caused by pork, as the  

 

65

doctor said, according to the saying, “The person who eats pork becomes piggish in 
some  ways;”9  the  pig  is  not  harmless  like  other  domestic  animals.  Its  meat  causes 
considerable harm rather than being beneficial. And it has been established medically 
that its powerful fat is also harmful, even in the lands of Europe which are powerfully 
cold, and is thus in fact and in meaning extremely harmful. 

Instances of wisdom such as these are purposes for the divine prohibition and for 
its being forbidden. The wisdom does not have to be present in every instance and all 
the time. The reason does not change with the purpose and wisdom changing. If the 
reason does not change, the injunction does not change. From this rule it may be seen 
just how far from the spirit of the Shari‘a the unfortunate man was when he spoke. No 
importance  should  be  given  to  what  he  said  regarding  the  Shari‘a.  The  Creator  has 
many animals in the form of unreasoning philosophers! 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

9 I wonder, does the fact that despite all the wondrous progress and civilization of Europe and its 
advances in science and knowledge beneficial for humanity, its people eat pork, not play some part in 
their becoming piggishly stuck in the darkness of materialism and naturalism, which are entirely the 
reverse of that progress, knowledge, and attainment? I ask you. Evidence that man’s temperament is 
affected by the food he eats is the saying: “The person who eats meat every day for forty days will 
suffer anxiety and sorrow in his heart,” which has become proverbial. 

 

66

An Addendum to the Answer to Your Question about 
Muhyiddin al-‘Arabi 

 
  
Q u e s t i o n : Muhyiddin al-‘Arabi considered the Unity of Existence to be of 
the  highest  level.  Likewise,  some  of  the  great  saints  who  took  the  path  of  love 
followed him. However, you say that this matter is not of the highest level and is not 
real;  that  it  is  rather  the  way,  to  a  degree,  of  those  who  become  intoxicated  and 
immersed in the divine, and of the people of love and ecstasy. So what, briefly, is the 
high  level  of  the  affirmation  of  divine  unity  pointed  out  by  the  clear  verses  of  the 
Qur’an, through the mystery of the legacy of prophethood? Can you explain it? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  It  is  a  hundred  times  beyond  the  ability  of  an  utterly 
powerless  unfortunate  like  myself  to  judge  those  elevated  stations  with  his  limited 
thought.  I  shall  just  explain  one  or  two  extremely  brief  points  proceeding  from  the 
effulgence of the All-Wise Qur’an. Perhaps they  will be useful in understanding the 
matter. 
 
FIRST POINT 

There are numerous reasons for becoming embroiled in the way of the  Unity of 

Existence. One or two of them may be described as follows: 

The  First  Reason:  Because  they  could  not  squeeze  into  their  brains  the 
maximum degree of the creativity of dominicality, nor entirely establish in their hearts 
the idea that everything, through the mystery of divine oneness, is held directly in the 
grasp of dominicality and that all things have existence through divine power, choice, 
and will, those who took that way were obliged to say that everything is either Him, 
or does not have existence, or is imaginary, or is His manifestation or emanation. 

The  Second  Reason:  The  mark  of  passionate  love  is  to  want  never  to  be 
separated from the beloved and to flee desperately from such separation; to tremble at 
the thought of parting, to fear distance from the beloved as though fearing Hell, and to 
abominate transience; to love union with the love of one’s own spirit and life, and to 
yearn  to  be  near  to  the  beloved  as  though  longing  for  Paradise.  Thus,  through 
adhering to a manifestation of divine immediacy in all things, those who took the way 
of  the  Unity  of  Existence  disregarded  separation and  distance;  supposing  union  and 
meeting to be permanent, they said: “There is no existent but He;” through the  

 

67

intoxication  of  love  and  as  demanded  by  the  ecstasy  of  permanence,  meeting,  and 
union,  they  imagined  that  in  the  Unity  of  Existence  was  a  most  pleasurable way  of 
illumination whereby they could be saved from the dreadfulness of separation.  

That is to say, the first reason sprang from the fact that the hand of their intellects 
was unable to reach up to some of the truths of belief, which were  extremely broad 
and  elevated;  they  were  unable  to  comprehend  them,  and  had  not  developed 
completely  in  regard  to  belief.  While  the  source  of  the  second  reason  was  the 
extraordinary  unfolding  of  their  hearts  from  the  point  of  view  of  love,  and  their 
wondrous expansion and breadth. 

However, the supreme level of divine unity, which the Purified Ones – who were 
the people of sobriety and great saints of the legacy of prophethood – saw through the 
explicit  expositions  of  the  Qur’an  is  both  extremely  elevated,  and  shows  both  the 
maximum level of dominicality and creativity and that all the divine names are real. It 
preserves  the  Qur’an’s  principles  and  does  not  spoil  the  balance  of  the  decrees  of 
dominicality. For they say that together with the oneness of His essence and His being 
free  of  space,  with  His  knowledge  Almighty  God  encompasses  and  determines 
directly all things together with all their attributes, and through  His will  He chooses 
and  specifies  them,  and  through  His  power  He creates  them.  He  creates  and  directs 
the whole universe as though it were a single being. 

He creates the huge spring with the ease of creating a flower. Nothing obstructs 
anything  else.  There  is  no  fragmentation  in  His  regarding  things.  He  is  present 
everywhere  at  the  same  instant  through  the  disposal  of  His  knowledge  and  power. 
There is no division or distribution in His disposal. This mystery has been expounded 
and proved decisively in the Sixteenth Word and in the Second Stopping-Place of the 
Thirty-Second  Word.  Since,  according  to  the  rule,  “Comparisons  are  incontestible,” 
no attention should be paid to defects in comparisons and allegories, I shall set forth a 
very  faulty  comparison  so  that  the  difference  between  the  two  ways  may  be 
understood to a degree. 

For example, let us imagine a huge, matchless, and wondrously adorned peacock 
which can fly from east to west in an instant, and opens and closes its wings, which 
stretch from north to south, are adorned with hundreds of thousands of fine patterns, 
and  in  every  single  feather  of  which  are  included  brilliant  arts.  Now,  there  are  two 
men observing it; they want to fly with the wings of the intellect and heart up to the 
elevated qualities of this bird, to its wondrous decorations. One looks at the peacock’s 
condition  and  form  and  the  marvellous  inscriptions  of  power on  all  its  feathers;  he 
loves it with extreme passion and ardour; he in part abandons his attentive  

 

68

reflective  thought,  and  clings  to  love.  But  then  he  sees  that  every day  those  lovable 
decorations  change  and  are  transformed.  Those  objects  of  his  love,  which  he 
worships, disappear and are lost. 

While  he  should  have  said  that  through  true  divine  unity,  which  he  could  not 
encompass  with  his  mind,  and  absolute  dominicality  and  the  oneness  of  the  divine 
essence,  they  were  the  artistic  decorations  of  an  Inscriber  possessing  universal 
creativity, he said instead – in order to console himself – that the spirit of the peacock 
was so sublime that its maker was within it, or that the peacock had become him, and 
that since its spirit had become one with its being, and its being had combined with its 
outward  appearance,  its  spirit’s  perfection  and  being’s  exaltedness  displayed  those 
manifestations, displaying every moment a different inscription and beauty; it was not 
a true creation through its will, but rather a manifestation, an emanation. 

As for the other man, he said that those harmonious, orderly decorations so full of 
art definitely required will, choice, intention, and purpose. It was impossible for there 
to be a manifestation without will, an emanation without choice. 

Yes, the peacock had a beautiful and elevated nature, but it could not be the doer; 
it was passive. It could not become one with the active agent. Its spirit was fine and 
exalted, but it could not be the creator and disposer, only receptive and a means. For 
observedly  in each of  its feathers was an art performed with infinite wisdom and an 
inscription and decoration made through an infinite power. And these could not occur 
without will and choice. The arts indicating perfect wisdom within perfect power, and 
perfect dominicality and mercy within perfect wisdom were not the work of some sort 
of manifestation. The scribe who had written that gilded notebook could not be inside 
it  and  be  united  with  it.  The  notebook  rather  only  had  contact  with  the  nib  of  the 
scribe’s pen. In which case, the wondrous decorations of the similitude of the peacock 
known as the universe were a gilded missive of the peacock’s Creator. 

Now, look at the peacock and read the missive. Say to its Scribe: “What wonders 
God  has  willed!  Blessed  be  God!  Glory  be  to  God!”  The  person  who  supposes  the 
missive to be the scribe, or the scribe to be inside the letter, or fancies the missive to 
be imagination, has surely mislaid his reason in the veils of love, and been unable to 
see the true form of reality. 

Among the varieties of passionate love, the one most giving rise to the way of the 
Unity  of  Existence,  is  love  of  this  world.  When  it  turns  into  true  love,  love  of  this 
world, which is temporary, is transformed into the Unity of Existence. A person loves 
a personal beloved with worldly love. Then,  

 

69

unable to  accept  in  his heart  his  beloved’s  transience  and ephemerality,  he  consoles 
himself by saying that his beloved is a mirror reflecting the beauty of the True Object 
of Love and Worship, and attaches himself to a reality, so acquiring permanence for 
him through true love. 

In  the  same  way,  when  due  to  the  constant  blows  of  death  and  separation  the 
strange love of the person who takes the huge world and the universe in its totality as 
his beloved is transformed into true love, he seeks refuge in the way of the Unity of 
Existence  in order to save that  great beloved of his from death and separation. If  he 
has  extremely  powerful  and  elevated  belief,  it  becomes  a  pleasurable,  luminous, 
acceptable  level,  as  with  those  resembling  Muhyi’d-Din  al-‘Arabi.  However,  it  is 
possible  he  may  fall  into  various  abysses,  embrace  materiality,  and  become 
submerged in causes. As for the  Unity of Witnessing,  it is  harmless; it  is  an exalted 
way of the people of sobriety. 

O God, show us what is indeed the truth, and make us follow it! 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

70

The Tenth Flash 

 
Blows Dealt by Divine Compassion 

 
 
 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
On the Day when every soul will be confronted with all the good it has done, 
and all the evil it has done, it willø wish there were a great distance between 
it and its evil. But God cautions you [to remember] Himself. And God is full 
of kindness to those who serve Him.(3:30) 

One meaning of the above verse is to be expounded and explained by the blows 
dealt by divine compassion that my comrades in the service of the Qur’an receive for 
mistakes they make as the result of human nature. So a succession of extra-ordinary 
events proceeding  from the service of the Qur’an will be explained together with an 
instance  of  Gawth  al-A‘zam’s1  wonder-working,  since  he  supervises  this  sacred 
service  with  God’s  permission  and  assists  it  with  his  saintly  influence.  Then  those 
who perform it may persevere earnestly in their service. 

There are three sorts of wonder-working associated with this sacred work: 
The First Sort is that aspect which prepares the work and urges those employed 

to perform it. 

The Second Sort removes obstacles and repulses the evil of those who oppose it 
and deals them blows. There are numerous instances of this second sort and they are 
lengthy,2 so postponing them to another time we shall discuss the third sort, which are 
the lightest. 

The Third Sort is this: Whenever those who work sincerely in this ser 

                                                 
1 See Note 8, Page 36-7. 
2 For example, people who oppose religion themselves suffer in this world a greater penalty than 

the torments and distress they inflict on students of the Risale-i Nur; they receive what they have given. 

 

71

vice become lax, they receive a compassionate  slap. So coming to their senses, they 
take up their work again. Incidents of this sort number more than a  hundred. Out of 
only  twenty,  thirteen  or  fourteen  received  compassionate  slaps,  while  six  or  seven 
received restraining slaps. 
 
THE FIRST 

This concerns this unfortunate Said: whenever I  have flagged  in my duties, and 
saying, “What is it to me?,” have become preoccupied with my own private affairs, I 
have received a slap. I have formed the opinion that I received it due to my neglect. 
Because whatever my purpose was that deceived me and spurred me on, I received a 
slap that was the reverse of it. Then studying the compassionate slaps that my sincere 
friends  have received, they were always the opposite of whatever their aim was – if 
they  were  neglectful  –  so  that  we  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  such  incidents 
were wonders proceeding from service of the Qur’an. 

For example, as long as this unfortunate Said was busy teaching the truths of the 
Qur’an in Van at the time of the Shaykh Said events,3 the suspicious government did 
not  and  could  not  interfere  with  me.  Then  when  I  said  “What  is  it  to  me?,”  and 
thinking of  myself  withdrew  into  a  ruined cave  on  Mount  Erek  in  order  to  save  my 
life  in  the  hereafter,  they  arrested  me  for  no  reason  and  sent  me  into  exile.  I  was 
brought to Burdur. 

There, again as long as I was serving the Qur’an… at that time all the exiles were 
watched  very  closely  and  I  was  supposed  to  report  to  the  police  in  person  every 
evening, but I and my sincere students held ourselves to be exceptions. The Governor 
there  complained  to  Fevzi  Pasha4  when  he  visited  but  Fevzi  Pasha  replied:  “Don’t 
interfere with him! Treat him with respect!” What made him say that was the sacred 
nature of service of the Qur’an. Yet whenever I was overcome by the idea of saving 
myself  and  thought  only  of  my  life  in  the  hereafter  and  there  was  a  temporary 
slackening in my serving the Qur’an, I received a slap contrary to my intentions. That 
is to say, I was sent from one place of exile to another. I was sent to Isparta. 

In  Isparta  I  took  up  my  duties  again.  After  twenty  days,  a  number of  cowardly 
people said by way of a warning: “Perhaps the government won’t look kindly on this 
situation. It would be better if you go a bit cautiously.”  

                                                 

3 Shaykh Said of Palu was the Naqshbandi shaikh who led the famous uprising in eastern Turkey 
against the Ankara government in early 1925. He was captured and sentenced to death in Diyarbakır, 
29th June 1925. (Tr.) 

4 This refers to Marshal Fevzi Çakmak, Chief of General Staff of the Turkish army. (Tr.) 

 

72

Again  the  idea  of  thinking  only  of  myself  took  hold  of  me,  and  I  said:  “Don’t  let 
anyone come!” And I was taken from that place of exile and sent to a third, to Barla. 

And in Barla whenever a slackness has come over me and the idea of thinking of 
myself  alone  has  gripped  me,  one  of  these  serpents  and  two-faced  hypocrites  from 
among ‘the worldly’5 has been  set to pester me. During this  eight  years  eighty  such 
incidents have befallen me; I could recount them, but am cutting them short so as not 
to bore people. 

My brothers! I have described some of the compassionate slaps I have received, 
now if  you will permit it and forgive me, I shall  relate some that have befallen  you. 
Don’t be offended. If anyone is offended, I will not put his name. 
 
THE SECOND 

My  true  brother  and  first  and  most  superior  and  self-sacrificing  student, 
Abdülmecid,6  had  a  fine  house  in  Van.  He  was  well-off  and  he  was  a  teacher. 
Following his own ideas, he did not join those who were attempting to send me to the 
border region against my wishes, which was a place more in need of Qur’anic service, 
and as though for my benefit, did not vote for it. As though, if I had gone there, my 
service of the Qur’an would not have been apolitical or sincere, and they would have 
expelled  him  from  Van  –  so  he  did  not  take  part.  But  he  received  a  compassionate 
slap contrary to his intentions, for he had to leave both Van, and his beautiful house, 
and his native region; he was compelled to go to Ergani. 
 
THE THIRD  

Hulûsi  Bey7  was  crucial  to  our  service  of  the  Qur’an.  There  were  a  number  of 
things  when  he  returned  to  his  native  region  from Eğridir  that  would  have  afforded 
him much enjoyment and worldly happiness, perhaps causing him to become slack in 
his service of the Qur’an, which pertains solely to the hereafter. For he was reunited 
with his parents, whom he had not seen for a long time, and he was back home, and 
because  he  had  returned  there  with  rank  and  honour,  the  world  was  smiling  on  him 
and  appeared  good.  However,  for  those  employed  in  serving  the  Qur’an,  either  the 
world must be vexed with them, or they must be vexed at the world, so that they can 
perform that service sincerely and earnestly. 

                                                 

5 ‘The worldly’ (ehl-i dünya): those whose view is restricted to the life of this world, and who 

disregard the hereafter, or those who sell religion for this world. (Tr.) 

6 See note 1, page 58. (Tr.) 
7 See note 2, page 58. (Tr.) 

 

73

Hulûsi’s heart was certainly unshakeable, but his situation drove him to slackness 
and  he  received  a  slap  from  divine  compassion.  For  one  or  two  years  a  number  of 
dissemblers were set to pester him, which drove away all his worldly pleasure. They 
made  both  the  world  vexed  at  him,  and  him  vexed  at  the  world.  So  in  the  true 
meaning of the word he embraced his duty earnestly. 
 
THE FOURTH 

This is Muhâjir Hâfız Ahmed.8 He himself said the following: 
“Yes, I confess that I made a mistake when interpretating the question of my life 
in  the hereafter  and  its connection  with  my  service  of  the  Qur’an.  I  had  a  wish  that 
would  cause  me  to  be  lax  in  my  service,  and  I  received  a  blow  that  was 
compassionate,  but  also  severe  and  was  atonement.  It  was  like  this:  my  Master 
(Ustad) was  not  in  favour of  the  new  measures.9  My  mosque  was  next  to  his  house 
and the Three Months10 were drawing close. If I had abandoned my mosque, both I 
would have forfeited much reward, and the district would have grown accustomed to 
not praying. If I had not carried out the new practices, I would have been barred. So 
according to my interpretation I wanted my Master, whom I loved more than my life, 
to temporarily move to another  village. I did not know that  if  he moved, or went to 
another region, it would cause a temporary lapse in my service of the Qur’an. Just at 
that  juncture  I  received  a  blow.  It  was  compassionate  but  so  awesome  that  three 
months  later  I  still  have  not  regained  my  senses.  However,  praise  be  to  God, 
according  to  what  my  Master  says,  it  was  imparted  to  him  that  we  may  hope  from 
divine mercy that each minute of the  calamity  is  equivalent to a day’s worship. For 
the  mistake  was  not  due  to  enmity;  the  wish  occurred  to  me  only  because  I  was 
thinking of my life in the hereafter.” 
 

THE FIFTH 

This is Hakkı Efendi.11 Since he is not here now, I am deputizing for him as I did 
for  Hulûsi  Bey,  and  say  this:  while  Hakkı  Efendi  was  carrying  out  to  the  letter  his 
duties as student, an immoral Kaymakam12 came to the district. So he hid what he had 
written so that harm should come neither to  

                                                 
8 See note 4, page 24. (Tr.) 
9 That is, innovations opposed to the marks of Islam, like the Turkish call to prayer. 
10 Şuhûr-u selâse (Ar. al-Shuhur al-Thalatha): The three holy months of Rajab, Sha‘ban, and 

Ramadan. (Tr.) 

11 See note 4, page 58. (Tr.) 
12 The head official of a district (Tr.) 

 

74

his  Master,  nor  to  himself.  He  temporarily  gave  up  his  service  of  the  Risale-i  Nur. 
Suddenly,  a  court  case  was  opened  against  him,  which  was  a  sort  of  slap  dealt  by 
divine  compassion.  He was  going  to  have  to pay  a  fine  of  a  thousand  liras.  He was 
subject to the threat for a  year, until  he came  here and we met, and on his return he 
again took up his service of the Qur’an and the duties of being a Risale-i Nur student. 
Then the compassionate slap’s sentence was lifted, and he was acquitted. 

Later a further duty commenced for the students, which concerned the writing out 
of the Qur’an in a new way.13 A section was given to Hakkı Efendi. He embarked on 
it  enthusiastically  and  wrote  out  a  thirtieth  part  of  the  Qur’an.  But  because  of  his 
straitened circumstances he felt compelled to secretly undertake someone’s defence in 
a court case. He suddenly received another compassionate slap. He broke the  finger 
he used to hold his pen with. It was as though warning him: “This finger won’t write 
out both a lawyer’s case and the Qur’an!” We were astonished at his finger because 
we did not know about his taking on the case. Then it was understood that the sacred, 
pure service of the Qur’an did not want to involve the fingers which were particular to 
it  in  other  work.  Anyway  I  know  Hulûsi  Bey  like  I  know  myself  and  spoke  in  his 
place, and Hakkı Bey is just the same. If he does not like my acting as his proxy, he 
can write about his slap himself! 
 
THE SIXTH 

This  is  Bekir  Efendi.14  He  is  not  here  at  present,  so  in  the  same  way  that  I 
deputized for my brother Abdülmecid, relying on his confidence and loyalty and what 
all my close friends like ﬁamlı Hafız and Süleyman Efendi say and know, I say this: 
Bekir Efendi had the Tenth Word printed. Then we sent him the Twenty-Fifth Word, 
about the Qur’an’s Miraculousness, to print before the new letters were introduced.15 
We also wrote that we would send him the printing costs, as we sent him the costs of 
printing the Tenth Word. But thinking of my poverty and seeing that the printing costs 
would  be  around  four  hundred  liras,  Bekir  Efendi  thought  to  himself:  “Perhaps  the 
Hoja won’t be pleased if I pay it out of my own pocket,” and his soul deceived him. It 
was  not  printed  and  caused  considerable  harm  to  our  service  of  the  Qur’an.  Two 
months later nine hundred liras of his were  

                                                 

13 This refers to its being written so as to show the miracle of the ‘coincidences.’ (For 

‘coincidences’, see note 1, page 56 – Tr.) 

14 Bekir Dikmen 1898-1954. He was a merchant of Barla. (Tr.) 
15 That is, the introduction of the Latin alphabet at the end of 1928. (Tr.) 

 

75

stolen  and  he  received  a  compassionate  but  severe  blow.  God  willing,  the  lost  nine 
hundred liras was like a sort of almsgiving. 
 
THE SEVENTH 

This  is  Şamlı  Hafız  Tevfik.16  He  himself  says:  “Yes,  I  confess  that  because  of 
some  things  I  did  unknowingly  and  in  error  that  would  have  caused  harm  to  our 
service of the Qur’an, I received two compassionate slaps. I have no doubt that they 
were the result of that. 

“The First: All praise be to God, I was endowed with handwriting of the Arabic 
script  which  is  to  a  degree  suitable  for  writing  the  Qur’an.  My  Master  first  of  all 
assigned  me  three  thirtieth  parts  of  the  Qur’an  to  write  out,  and  divided  the  rest 
among the others. Desire to write out the Qur’an destroyed my  wish to perform the 
service of writing out the rough and final drafts of the parts of the Risale-i Nur. I even 
had  the  conceited  idea  of  wanting  to  surpass  the  others  who  did  not  know  how  to 
write the Arabic script properly. I had even said arrogantly when my Master told me 
as  a  precaution  about  the  writing  that  it  was  for  him:  “I  know  this.  I  don’t  need  to 
learn it.” I received an extraordinary and unimaginable slap because of this mistake: 
what I wrote was not even as good as that of a brother (Husrev) who knew the least 
about writing the Arabic script. We were all astonished. And we have understood now 
that it was a slap. 

“The Second: I confess that two of my attitudes were damaging for the complete 
sincerity necessary for service to the Qur’an, which has to be purely for God’s sake, 
and I received a severe blow. For I am like a stranger in the region, and foreign. Also 
–  but  I  should  not  complain  –  since  I  did  not  observe  frugality  and  contentment, 
important  rules  of  my  Master,  I  suffer  from  poverty.  I  am  compelled  to  mix  with 
selfish and arrogant people, and so, may God forgive it, I was forced to be generous in 
hypocritical  and  sycophantic  manner.  My  Master  frequently  warned,  reminded,  and 
scolded me, but unfortunately I could not stop myself. On the one  hand satans  from 
among jinn and men were profiting from this situation of mine which was opposed to 
the spirit of service of the All-Wise Qur’an, and on the other it caused a coldness and 
slackness in our service. 

“In  the  face  of  this  fault  of  mine,  I  received  a  severe,  but  God  willing 
compassionate, blow. I  have  no doubt that it  happened in consequence of that  fault. 
The blow was this: although for eight years I have had both close  

                                                 

16 Tevfik Göksu, 1887-1965, was Bediuzzaman’s student and scribe in Barla, and was imprisoned 

together with him in Eskişehir and Denizli. He saw Bediuzzaman in Damascus in 1911, where his 
father was serving in the army, hence his name Şamlı. (Tr.) 

 

76

relations  with  my  Master  and  been  his  writer  of  rough  drafts  and  final  drafts,  for 
around  eight  months,  I  had  been  unable  to  benefit  from  the  Risale-i  Nur.  We  were 
astonished at this situation. Both I and my Master sought the reason, wondering why 
it  was  thus.  Now  we  feel  certain  that  those  truths  of  the  Qur’an  are  light  and 
luminous, and cannot unite with the darkness of artificiality, flattery, and abasement. 
So the meaning of those truths’ lights were drawing away from me, appearing foreign 
to  me  and  as  strangers.  I  beseech  Almighty  God  that  He  will  grant  me  sincerity 
worthy  of  such  service,  and  save  me  from  hypocrisy  and  artificiality  towards  ‘the 
worldly.’ I request of firstly my Master and all my brothers that they pray for me. 

                                                            “The most faulty, 
                                                          “Şamlı Hafız Tevfik” 

 
THE EIGHTH 

This  is  Seyrani.  Like  Husrev,  he  was  one of  my  students  who  was  enthusiastic 
about the Risale-i Nur and had a good understanding of it. I consulted my students in 
Isparta about the ‘coincidences,’ which are a key to the mysteries of the Qur’an and to 
the  science  of  jafr.  They  responded  and  took  part  eagerly,  but  because  Seyrani  had 
other  ideas  and points  of  interest,  he  did  not respond,  and  in addition  wanted  me  to 
give  up  the  truth  I  knew  to  be  certain.  He  wrote  me  a  letter  that  upset  me 
considerably. I said: “Alas! I have lost this student.” Certainly I wanted to enlighten 
his  ideas,  but  a  further  meaning  confused  matters.  He  received  a  blow  from  divine 
compassion: he remained for nearly a year in a place of seclusion (that is, in prison). 
 
THE NINTH  

This  is  the  Hâfız  Zühtü  the  Elder.  At  a  time  he  was  as  though  supervising  the 
Risale-i  Nur  students  in  Ağrus,  not  considering  the  students’  spiritual  honour  to  be 
sufficient – although they had made it their way to follow the practices of the Prophet 
(UWBP) and avoid innovations – he took it on himself to teach a serious innovation 
in the hope of increasing his standing in the eyes of ‘the worldly.’ He perpetrated an 
error that was diametrically opposed to our way. He received an awesome slap from 
divine  compassion.  An  incident  occurred  that  completely  destroyed  his  family’s 
honour.  Unfortunately,  Hâfız  Zühtü  the  Younger  was  also  affected  by  the  grievous 
incident although  he was  not deserving of any  slap. But God willing  it  will  act as a 
beneficial surgical operation delivering his heart from worldly attachment and making 
it over totally to the Qur’an. 

 

77

THE TENTH 

This is someone called Hâfız Ahmed (May God have mercy on him). For two or 
three  years  he  wrote  out  the treatises  in  encouraging  fashion  and  he  benefited  from 
them.  Then  ‘the  worldly’  took  advantage  of  a  weak  trait  in  his  character.  His 
enthusiam  was  dampened.  He  had  relations  with  ‘the  worldly,’  perhaps  so  that  he 
would avoid being harmed by them and have some say with them, and win some sort 
of  position,  and  make  his  scant  livelihood  more  plentiful.  But  in  return  for  the 
slackness and harm that was thus caused to his service of the Qur’an, he received two 
blows. One was that he had to support five more people with his scant means, and his 
situation became truly wretched. The second slap: as someone who was sensitive  in 
regard  to  honour  and  self-respect  and  could  not  brook  anyone’s  criticism  or 
objections, he was unknowingly used as a shield by  some cunning people  in  such  a 
way  that  his  honour  was  sullied.  Ninety  per  cent  of  his  honour  was  destroyed  and 
ninety  per  cent  of  people  were  turned  against  him.  May  God  forgive  him!  God 
willing, he will come to his senses and return in part to his duty. 
 
THE ELEVENTH 

This was not written since perhaps he would not agree. 

 
THE TWELFTH 

This  is  the  teacher,  Galib  (May  God  have  mercy  on  him).  Yes,  he  performed 
great  services  loyally  and  appreciatively  in  writing  out  final  drafts  of  the  treatises, 
displaying no weakness in the face of any difficulties. Most days he would come, and 
listening eagerly, copy them down. Then in return for a fee of thirty liras he had the 
whole  of  The  Words  and  Letters  written  out.  His  aim  was  to  distribute  them  in  his 
native  region and  to  enlighten the  people  there. But due  to  certain  ideas, he  did  not 
distribute  the  treatises  as  he  had  envisaged  and  left  them  in  their  box.  Suddenly  a 
grievous  event  occurred  due  to  which  he  suffered  distress  for  a  year.  He  gained 
numerous  unjust,  tyrannical  enemies  in  place  of  a  handful  of  official  enemies  who 
would have been inimical just because he had distributed the treatises, and lost some 
of his friends. 
 
THE THIRTEENTH 

This is Hâfız Halid17 (May God grant him mercy). He said:  

                                                 

17 A teacher by profession, Hafız Halid Tekin was a native of Barla. He was one of 

Bediuzzaman’s close students there, also acting as his scribe. (Tr.) 

 

78

“Yes,  I  confess  that  I  was  feverishly  engaged  in  writing out rough drafts of the 
works  my  Master  disseminated  in  serving  the  Qur’an,  when  the  post  of  imam  in  a 
mosque in our quarter became available. With the intention of dressing once again in 
my  former  robe  and  wearing  the  turban,  I  temporarily  neglected  my  service  and 
avoided doing it. I received a compassionate slap contrary to my intentions. Although 
for  eight  or  nine  months  I  acted  as  imam,  extraordinarily  I  was  unable  to  wear  the 
turban,  despite  the  repeated  promises  of  the  Mufti.  I  have  no  doubt  that  this 
compassionate slap was the result of my error. I was both someone addressed by my 
Master, and was his scribe of rough drafts. He suffered difficulties due to my neglect. 
In any event... Still, thanks be to God, we realized my error and understood just how 
sacred  this  service  is.  We  were  confident  that  we  had  behind  us  a  Master  like  a 
protecting angel, like Shah Geylani. 

                                                        “The weakest of God’s servants, 
                                                                      “Hâfız Halid” 

 
THE FOURTEENTH 

This consists of the three small slaps the three Mustafa’s received. 
The First: For eight  years Mustafa Çavuş (May God grant him mercy) attended 
to our  small  private  mosque,  and  saw  to its  stove, paraffin,  and  even  the matches.  I 
learnt later that for the eight years he provided for the paraffin and matches out of his 
own pocket. On the night before Friday in particular he would join the congregation 
as long as there was no other essential matter to attend to. Then, taking advantage of 
his ingenuousness, ‘the worldly’ said to him: “They are going to interfere in Hâfız’s – 
one of the scribes of the Words – wearing a turban. He should also temporarily stop 
making the call to prayer secretly. You tell the scribe to take off his turban before they 
remove it by  force.” They did  not know that  it was extremely difficult  for someone 
with a lofty spirit like Mustafa Çavuş to tell someone else employed in service of the 
Qur’an to remove his turban. But he told him what they had said. 

That night I dreamt that Mustafa Çavuş came to my room with dirty hands behind 
the  Kaymakam.  I  asked  him  the  following  day:  “Mustafa  Çavuş,  who  did  you  see 
today?  I dreamt of  you with dirty  hands behind the Kaymakam.” He replied: “Alas! 
The village headman told me to ‘tell the scribe.’ I didn’t know what was behind it.” 

Also, that same day he brought almost an okka18 of paraffin to the mosque. In a 

way he had never done before, he left the door open and a  

                                                 

18 An okka was the equivalent of 2.9 lbs. (Tr.) 

 

79

kitten  entered.  Then  a  big  man  came,  and  supposing  the  paraffin  in  the  ewer  to  be 
water, sprinkled it all around the mosque, in order to clean it and the mess left by the 
kitten on the prayer-mat. It is extraordinary that he did not smell the paraffin. That is 
to say, the mosque did not allow the man to smell  it, in order to tell Mustafa Çavuş 
through the tongue of disposition: “We don’t need your paraffin. I haven’t accepted it 
because  of  the  mistake  you  made.”  That  week  on  the  eve  of  Friday  and  other 
important prayers, even, he was unable to join the congregation, although he tried to. 
Then he repented earnestly and asked forgiveness, and he regained his purity of heart. 
The  Second  Mustafa’s:  These  are  my  worthy,  hard-working,  and  important 
student  Mustafa  from  Kuleönü,  and  his  most  loyal,  self-sacrificing  friend,  Hâfız 
Mustafa (May God grant  him mercy). After the religious festival  I sent word telling 
them not to come lest ‘the worldly’ bother us and discourage us in our service of the 
Qur’an,  but  if  they  had  to  come,  they  should  come  singly.  Then  one  night,  three  of 
them came all together. They intended to leave before dawn. In a way that had never 
happened  before,  neither  Mustafa  Çavuş,  nor  Süleyman  Efendi,  nor  myself,  nor 
themselves, had thought of taking any clear precautions; we were made to forget to do 
so. Each of us left it to the others and took no measures. They left before dawn. Then 
for  two  hours  they  were  pounded  by  such  a  storm  that  I  was  alarmed  thinking  that 
they would not survive it. This winter there had been no such storm, nor had I pitied 
anyone  so  much.  As  a  punishment  for  his  lack  of  caution,  I  was  going  to  send 
Süleyman after them to find out if they were well and safe. Mustafa Çavuş said: “If he 
goes, he will be stranded too, and I’ll have to go after him to find him. Then Abdullah 
Çavuş  will  have  to  come  after  me.”  So  saying:  “We  place  our  trust  in  God!”  we 
waited. 

Q u e s t i o n : You consider the calamities visited on your special friends to be 
slaps;  punishment  for  laxity  in  their  service  of  the  Qur’an.  Whereas  those  that  are 
truly inimical to you and to the service of the Qur’an remain safe and sound. Why are 
friends dealt slaps while enemies are left untroubled? 

T h e  A n s w e r : According to, “Wrongdoing does not continue, but unbelief 
does,”19  friends’  errors  are  wrongdoing  of  a  sort  in  this  service  of  the  Qur’an,  and 
therefore  are  swiftly  punished.  A  person  receives  a  compassionate  slap  and  if  he  is 
sensible,  realizes  his  error.  But  enemies  oppose  this  service  and  try  to prevent  it  on 
account of misguidance. Knowingly or  

                                                 

19 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, ii, 107. 

 

80

unknowingly,  their  aggression  against  our  service  assists  atheism.  Since  unbelief 
persists, generally they do not receive any blows immediately. 

Just as the penalties of those perpetrating small crimes are delivered locally and 
serious  crimes  are  sent  to  the  high  courts,  so  too,  according  to  the  rules,  the  small 
errors of believers and close friends are punished swiftly and in part in this world, in 
order to quickly purify them. But the crimes of the people of misguidance are so great 
that since their punishments exceed this brief worldly life, as required by justice they 
are  referred  to  the  Supreme  Tribunal  in  the  eternal  realm,  and  mostly  they  do  not 
receive any punishment here. 

The  Hadith  “This  world  is  the  prison  of  the  believers  and  the  Paradise  of  the 
unbelievers”20 alludes to this truth. That is to say, because the believer receives partial 
punishment  for  his  faults  in  this  world,  it  is  a  place  of  punishment  for  him.  It  is  a 
dungeon  and  Hell  in  relation  to  his  happiness  in  the  hereafter.  And  since  the 
unbelievers  will  not  be  released  from  Hell  and  they  in  part  receive  the  rewards  for 
their good works in this world and their large  sins are postponed, this world is their 
Paradise  in  relation  to  their  life  in  the  hereafter.  For  in  reality  and  in  meaning  the 
believer is also far happier in this world than the unbeliever. A believer’s faith is quite 
simply like a Paradise in his spirit; while the unbeliever’s unbelief sets afire a sort of 
Hell in his being. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

 

 
 

                                                 

20 Muslim, Zuhd, 3; Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 16; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 3; Musnad, ii, 197, 323, 389, 485. 

 

81

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

The Eleventh Flash 

 
The Stairway of the Practices of the Prophet (UWBP) 
and Antidote for the Sickness of Innovations 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Now  has  come  to  you  a  Messenger  from  among  yourselves;  it  grieves  him 
that you should perish; ardently anxious is he over you; to the believers is he 
most kind and merciful.(9:128) 

[The  first  station  of  this  verse  is  the  Highway  of  the  Prophet’s 
(UWBP)  Practices,1  and  its  second  station,  the  Stairway  of  the 
Prophet’s (UWBP) Practices.] 

But if they turn away, say: “God suffices me, there is no god but He; in Him 
do  I  place  my  trust  –  He  the  Sustainer  of  the  Throne  [of  Glory] 
Supreme!”(9:129) * Say: “If you do love God, follow me: God will love you 
and forgive you your sins; for God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.”(3:31) 

 
Eleven  of  the  hundreds  of  points  concerning  these  two  sublime  verses  will  be 

explained concisely. 
 
FIRST POINT 

God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  said:  “Whoever 
adheres  to  my  practices  (Sunna)  when  my  community  is corrupted  shall  receive the 
reward of a hundred martyrs.”2 

Yes, to adhere to the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices is certainly highly  

                                                 
1 That is, the Fourth Flash. (Tr.) 
2 Ibn ‘Adiyy, al-Kamil fi’l-Du‘afa’, ii, 739; al-Mundhiri, al-Targhib wa’l-Tarhib, i, 41; Tabarani, 
al-Majma‘ al-Kabir, 1394; ‘Ali ibn Husam al-Din, Muntakhabat Kanz al-‘Ummal, i, 100; al-Haythami, 
Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, viii, 132. 

 

82

commendable  and  worthwhile,  and  is  even  more  so  when  innovations  are  rife.  To 
comply  with  them  in  even  a  small  matter  of  behaviour,  particularly  when  the 
Prophet’s  (UWBP)  community  is  corrupted,  signifies  a  powerful  belief  and  fear  of 
God.  And  to  follow  the  practices  recalls  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings and peace) directly, and such recollection is transformed into recollection of 
the  divine  presence.  The  moment  they  are  observed  in  even  the  least  significant 
dealings, in the conduct of eating,3 drinking,4 or sleeping,5 such habitual, natural acts 
become  meritorious  acts  of  worship  in  compliance  with  the  Shari‘a.  For  the  person 
thinks  of  following  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  and  conceives  of  his  actions  as 
conduct  of  the  Shari‘a.  Then  he  recalls  that  the  Messenger  (UWBP)  brought  the 
Shari‘a, and then his heart turns to Almighty God, the True Lawgiver, and he gains a 
sort of awareness of the divine presence and a sense of worship. 

By  virtue  of  this  mystery,  the  person  who  makes  it  his  habit  to  follow  the 
Prophet’s (UWBP) practices transforms all  his acts into worship, and may make  his 
whole life fruitful and yielding of reward. 
 
SECOND POINT 

Imam-i  Rabbani,  Ahmad  Faruqi  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him)  said:  “I  saw 
while traversing the degrees in my spiritual journeying that the ranks of the saints that 
were most brilliant, splendid, subtle, and sound were those who made following the 
Prophet’s  (UWBP)  practices  the  basis  of  their  way.  Even  ordinary  saints  of  those 
ranks appeared more splendid than the highest saints of the other.”6 

Yes, Imam-i Rabbani, the Regenerator of the Second Millennium (May God be 
pleased with him) speaks the truth. One who takes the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices as 
his guiding principles rises to the station of being beloved of God under the shadow of 
God’s Beloved (UWBP). 
 
THIRD POINT 

At a time this poor Said was struggling to emerge from the Old Said, his intellect 
and  heart  were  floundering  among  truths  in  a  terrible  spiritual  storm  resulting  from 
lack  of  a  guide  and  the  pride of  his  evil-commanding  soul.  They  were  being  tossed 
around,  rising  and  falling,  sometimes  from  the  Pleiades  to  the  ground,  sometimes 
from the ground to the Pleiades. 

                                                 

265. 

3 See, Tirmidhi, At’ima, 47; Abu Da’ud, Ashriba, 15; Ibn Maja, At‘ima, 7; Musnad, vi, 143, 207, 

4 See, Bukhari, Ashriba, 26; Muslim, Ashriba, 122-3; Tirmidhi, Ashriba, 14. 
5 See, Bukhari, Da‘wat, 8; Tirmidhi, Da‘wat, 29; Abu Da’ud, Adab, 177. 
6 Imam Rabbani, al-Maktubat, i, 240 (No: 260). 

 

83

At that time I observed that like qibla-directing compasses showing the course to 
be  followed  in  ships,  each  of  the  matters  of  the  practices,  even  small  points  of 
conduct,  were  like  electric  switches  among  innumerable  hazardous,  dark  ways. 
Whenever  in  the  course  of  that  spiritual  journeying  I  saw  myself  under  awesome 
pressure  overwhelmed  by  truly  burdensome  loads,  I  followed  the  matters  of  the 
practices touching on the situation, I experienced a lightness as though all my burdens 
were  being  lifted  from  me.  By  submitting  to  them,  I  was  saved  from  doubts  and 
scruples,  that  is,  from  such  anxieties  as:  “Is  this  course  of  action  right,  is  it 
beneficial?”  But  if  I  gave  them  up,  I  looked and  saw  that  the  pressure  was  intense; 
there were numerous ways and it could not be known where they  led. The load was 
heavy,  and  I  was  utterly  powerless.  My  view  was  short,  and  the  way,  dark.  But 
whenever I adhered to the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices, the way was lit up and seen 
to  be  safe.  I  felt  as  though  the  load  was  being  lightened  and  the  pressure  lifted.  At 
those times I confirmed through my own observations what Imam-i Rabbani had said. 
 
FOURTH POINT 

At  one  time,  I  saw  myself  in  a  strange  world  that  arose  from  a  state  of  mind 
produced by contemplating death and affirming the proposition “Death is a reality,”7 
and from the transience and passing of the world. I saw myself as a corpse standing at 
the head of three huge corpses. 

One:  I  was  like  a  tombstone  at  the  head  of  the  immaterial  corpse  of  all  living 
creatures,  with  which  I  was  connected  through  my  life  and  which  had  entered  the 
grave of the past. 

The  Second:  In  the  graveyard of  the  globe on  the  face  this  century,  which was 
the tombstone at the head of the vast corpse buried in the grave of the past of all the 
species of living creatures, with which mankind is connected through its life, I was a 
mere point that would be swiftly erased, an ant that would quickly die. 

The Third: Since the universe is certain to die on Doomsday, that is how I saw it. 
In  addition  to  seeing  myself  in  terror  at  the  death  agonies  of  that  vast  corpse,  in 
wonder and astonishment at its death, my own death too, which is certain to occur in 
the future, appeared to be happening at that time. In accordance with “And if they turn 
away  (to  the  end  of  the  verse),”(9:129)  on  my  death  all  beings,  all  my  beloveds, 
turned their backs on me, abandoning me and leaving me alone. My spirit was being 
driven towards  

                                                 

‘Aqida Ahl al-Athar, i, 121. 

7 See, Ahmad ibn Muhammad, Kitab Usul al-Din, i, 213; al-Qinnawji, Qatf al-Thamar fi Bayan 

 

84

the future on the side of post-eternity, which resembles a boundless ocean. Whether it 
wanted or not, it would be cast into the ocean. 

While  in  that  truly  strange  and  sorrowful  state  of  mind,  help  reached  me  from 
belief and from the Qur’an; the verse, “But if they turn away, say: ‘God suffices me, 
there is no god but He; in Him do I place my trust – He the Sustainer of the Throne 
[of  Glory]  Supreme!’”  came to  my  assistance,  like  a  safe  and  trusty  boat.  My  spirit 
boarded  the  verse  with  complete  confidence  and  joy.  I  understood  that  besides  its 
explicit  meaning,  an  allusive  meaning  had  consoled  me  so  that  I  had  found 
tranquillity and serenity. 

Yes,  its  explicit  meaning  says  to  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings and peace): “If the people of misguidance turn away, shun your Shari‘a and 
practices and do not heed the Qur’an, do not worry. Say: Almighty God is enough for 
me. I place my trust in Him. He will raise up others in their place who will follow me. 
The throne of His rule encompasses everything; the rebellious cannot escape outside 
its  bounds,  nor  do  those  who  seek  assistance  remain  unaided.”  While  its  allusive 
meaning says this: 

“O man! And O leader and guide of mankind! If all beings leave you and depart 
for non-existence on the path of transience; if living beings part from you and hasten 
down the road of death; if people abandon you and enter the graveyard; if the people 
of neglect and misguidance do not heed you and fall into darkness; do not be anxious. 
Say: Almighty God suffices me. Since He exists, everything exists. Those who have 
departed  have  not  gone  to  non-existence;  they  have  departed  for  another  of  His 
realms. Out of His infinite generosity and from among His innumerable soldiers, that 
Owner of the Sublime Throne sends others in their place. Those who have entered the 
graveyard have  not  been  annihilated;  they  have  departed for  another  world.  He will 
send other officials in their place. And He can send obedient servants who follow the 
true path  in  place  of  those  who  fall  into  misguidance.  Since  it  is  thus,  He  takes  the 
place of everything. Nothing can take the place of His favours, His regard.” 

This  allusive  meaning  caused  the  three  awesome  corpses  which  had  filled  me 
with  terror  to  take  on  another  form.  They  became  a  wisdom-displaying  passage,  an 
instructive  excursion,  a  journeying  for  the  performance  of  duties,  a  demobilization 
and a charging with duties, whereby the universe is shaken up, and comes and goes. 

 

85

FIFTH POINT 

The sublime verse, 

Say: “If you do love God, follow me: God will love you”(3:31)  

proclaims  in  definite  fashion  just  how  necessary  and  important  it  is  to  follow  the 
Prophet’s  (UWBP)  practices.  Yes,  among  the  syllogisms  of  logic,  this  verse  is  the 
most powerful and certain of the sort called hypothetical or conditional syllogisms. It 
is as follows: 

To exemplify a hypothetical syllogism it is said in logic: “If the sun comes out, it 
will  be  daytime.”  For  a  positive  result  it  is  said:  “The  sun  has  come  out.  One  may 
therefore  conclude  that  it  is  daytime.”  For  a  negative  result,  it  is  said:  “It  is  not 
daytime.  One  therefore  draws  the  conclusion  that  the  sun  has  not  come  out.” 
According to logic, these two conclusions, negative and positive, are definite. 

In  just  the  same  way,  the  above  verse  says:  “If  you  love  God,  you  will  follow 
God’s Beloved (UWBP). If you do not follow him, it points to the conclusion that you 
do not love God.” If a person  loves God, it entails following the practices of God’s 
Beloved (UWBP). Yes, the person who believes in Almighty God will certainly obey 
Him. And the most acceptable, the most direct, and the shortest among the ways of 
obeying Him is without doubt the way God’s Beloved (UWBP) showed and followed. 
Yes,  it  is  necessary  and  self-evident  that  the  All-Generous  One  of  Beauty  who 
fills the universe with so many bounties should want thanks from conscious creatures 
in  return.  And  clearly  that  All-Wise  One  of  Glory  who  adorns  the  universe  with  so 
many  miracles  of  art  will  make  the  most  excellent  of  conscious  creatures  His 
addressee and interpreter, and the herald and leader of His servants. And certainly and 
self-evidently  that  All-Beauteous  One  of Perfection,  who  makes  the  universe reflect 
the  innumerable  manifestations  of  His  beauty  and  perfections,  will  give  the  most 
perfect  worshipful  stance  to  the  person  who  is  the  most  comprehensive,  perfect 
measure  and  means  of  displaying  His  beauty,  perfection,  names,  and  art,  which  He 
clearly loves and wants to display; He will make his conduct a fine example to others 
and encourage them to follow him so that his fine conduct may appear in others too. 

I n  S h o r t : Love of God necessitates and results in following the Prophet’s 
(UWBP) practices. How fortunate the person who follows them to a large extent! And 
woe on the person who does not appreciate the practices and adopts innovations! 

 

 

86

SIXTH POINT 

The  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  said:  “All 
innovations  are  misguidance,  and  all  misguidance  leads  to  Hell.”8  That  is  to  say, 
according to the verse, 

This day have I perfected for you your religion,(5:3) 

not  to  care  for  the  rules  of  the  Illustrious  Shari‘a  and  principles  of  the  Prophet’s 
(UWBP)  practices  after  they  have  been  completed  and  perfected  and  to  adopt  new 
creations,  or  God  forbid,  create  innovations,  which  infers  considering  them  to  be 
deficient, is misguidance and leads to Hell-fire. 

There are degrees in the practices:9 some are compulsory; these may not be given 
up. This sort are described in detail in the Illustrious Shari‘a. They are incontestable 
and can in no way be changed. Another sort are voluntary, and these are of two sorts: 
One sort includes those practices related to worship. They too are described in the 
books  of  the  Shari‘a  and  to  change  them  is  innovation.  The  other  sort  is  known  as 
“conduct”  (adab);  these  practices  are  mentioned  in  the  books  of  the  Prophet’s 
(UWBP)  biography.  Opposition  to  them  cannot  be  called  innovation,  but  it  is 
opposition of a sort to the Prophet’s (UWBP) conduct and means not benefiting from 
its  light  and  true  courtesy.  Following  this  sort  entails  emulating  him  in  customary, 
natural acts and dealings, which are known through unanimous reports. For example, 
there  are  numerous  practices  showing  the  conduct  of  speaking,  and  explaining  the 
principles of eating, drinking, and sleeping, and social relations. Practices of this sort 
are called “conduct.” The person who practises them transforms his  habitual actions 
into  worship  and  receives  significant  effulgence.  Practising  the  smallest  aspect  of 
such conduct recalls God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace), which 
imparts a light to his heart. 

The most important among the practices are those that  symbolize Islam and are 
connected with its ‘marks.’ The marks of Islam are worship, concern the community, 
and  quite  simply  are  general  rights  of  a  sort.  Just  as  the  whole  community  benefits 
from  one  person  doing  them,  so  too  if  he  gives  them  up,  the  whole  community  is 
answerable. There can be no hypocrisy in the performance of marks of this sort, and 
they should be proclaimed openly. Even if they are of the voluntary sort, they are still 
more important than personal obligatory acts. 

                                                 

8 Muslim, Jum‘a, 43; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 5; Nasa’i, ‘Idayn, 22; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 6, 7; 

Darimi, Muqaddima, 16, 23; Musnad, iii, 310, 371; iv, 126, 127. 

9 See, Darimi, Muqaddima, 49; al-Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Awsat, iv, 215; al-Daylami, al-Musnad, 

ii, 345. 

 

87

SEVENTH POINT 

The  Practices  of  the  Prophet  (UWBP)  are  courtesy.  There  is  no  matter  among 
them  beneath  which  a  light,  and  courtesy,  is  not  found.  God’s  Noble  Messenger 
(Upon  whom be blessings  and  peace)  said:  “My  Sustainer taught  me  good  conduct, 
and  how  well  he  taught  me.”10  Yes,  anyone  who  studies  his  biography  and  is 
acquainted  with  his  practices  will  certainly  understand  that  Almighty  God  brought 
together in His Beloved every sort of courtesy and good conduct. So if anyone gives 
up  the  practices,  he  abandons  courtesy.  He  exemplifies  the  rule,  “The  ill-mannered 
person  is  deprived  of  divine  favour,”  and  is  discourteous  in  a  way  that  causes  him 
loss. 

Q  u  e  s  t  i  o  n  :  How  can  there  be  courtesy  in  the  face  of  the  Knower  of  All 
Things,  who  sees  and  knows  everything  and  from  whom  nothing  can  be  hidden? 
Situations which cause shame or embarrasment cannot be concealed from Him. One 
sort of courtesy is covering the necessary members and veiling distasteful situations. 
But nothing can be hidden from the sight of the Knower of All Things. 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :    Firstly:  Giving  it  the  greatest  importance,  the  Glorious 
Creator wants to show that His art is beautiful; He veils detestable things; He attracts 
attention to His bounties by decorating them. So too, He wants to show to conscious 
beings that His creatures and servants are beautiful. Their appearing in ugly situations 
is a sort of rebellion against His names of Beauteous, Adorner, Subtle, and Wise, and 
is contrary to courtesy. Thus, the courtesy of the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices means 
assuming a stance of pure courtesy within the bounds of the Glorious Maker’s names. 
Secondly: Professionally, a doctor may examine the private member of someone 
who is canonically a stranger to him, and if necessary it may be shown to him and this 
cannot be said to be discourteous. Indeed, it may be said that the conduct of medicine 
requires  it.  But  the  same  doctor  may  not  examine  the  member  as  a  man,  or  as  a 
preacher or teacher, and courtesy cannot issue a fatwa permitting it to be shown. To 
do so would be shameless. 

In  just  the same  way,  the  Glorious  Maker  has  numerous  names  and  each  has  a 
different  manifestation.  For  example,  just  as  the  name  of  Oft-Forgiving  requires the 
existence  of  sins  and  Veiler,  the  existence of  faults,  so  the  name of  Beauteous does 
not wish to see ugliness. Names pertaining to divine beauty and perfection like Subtle, 
Munificent,  All-Wise,  and  All-Compassionate  require  that  beings  be  in  the  most 
beautiful form and best possible situations. Such names want to display their beauties 
in the view  

                                                 

al-Khafa’, i, 70. 

10 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, i, 224; Ibn Taymiyya, Majmu’ Fatawa, xviii, 375; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf 

 

88

of angels, spirit beings, jinn and man through the beautiful states and fine conduct of 
beings. Thus, the conduct of the practices are the signs of this elevated conduct, and 
its principles and samples. 
 
EIGHTH POINT 

Coming  after  the  verse,  “Now  has  come  to  you a  Messenger  [to  the end  of  the 
verse],”(9:128)  which  shows  the  Noble  Messenger’s  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and 
peace)  perfect  kindness  and  compassion  towards  his  community,  the  verse,  “But  if 
they turn away, say: ‘God suffices me...’”(9:129) says: 

O mankind! And O Muslims! You should understand how lacking in conscience 
and unreasonable it is to turn away from the practices and the decrees that the Noble 
Prophet  (UWBP)  conveys  as 
though  casting  aspersions  on  his  self-evident 
compassion,  for  he  guides  you  with  infinite  kindness,  expending  all  his  strength  for 
your good, and curing with his practices your spiritual wounds. 

O compassionate Prophet and clement Messenger!  If they do not recognize this 
vast  compassion  of  yours  and  out  of  their  foolishness  turn  their  backs  and  do  not 
listen,  don’t  be  anxious.  Sufficient  for  you  is  the  All-Glorious  One,  under  whose 
command  are  the  cohorts  of  the  heavens  and  earth,  and  the  sovereignty  of  whose 
dominicality rules over the sublime all-encompassing throne. He will muster around 
you His true, obedient troops and make them heed you and accept your decrees! 

Yes, there  is  no matter of the Shari‘a of Muhammad (UWBP) and his practices 
which does not contain numerous instances of wisdom. This wretched one claims and 
is ready to prove it, despite all his faults and powerlessness. Furthermore, the seventy 
to  eighty  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  so  far  written  are  like  seventy  to  eighty  truthful 
witnesses testifying to how full of wisdom and truth are the matters of Muhammad’s 
(UWBP) practices and his Shari‘a. If I were capable of it and they had been written, 
seven thousand treatises on this subject could not completely describe those instances 
of wisdom, let alone seventy. 

Moreover, I have observed and experienced perhaps a thousand times in my own 
self  that  the  principles  and  matters  of  the  Shari‘a  and  practices  of  the  Prophet 
(UWBP)  are  all  highly  beneficial  remedies  for  sicknesses  of  the  spirit,  mind,  and 
heart,  and  particularly  for  social  sicknesses,  and  that  matters  put  forward  by 
philosophy cannot take their place, and to an extent I have made known to others in 
the  Risale-i  Nur  what  I  have  experienced.  If  anyone  doubts  this  claim  of  mine,  let 
them refer to the parts of the Risale-i Nur and see for themselves. 

 

89

It  may  be  seen  from  this  just  how  profitable  it  is  to  try  to  follow  as  far  as  is 
possible  the  practices  of  such  a  person,  and  how  advantageous  for  eternal  life,  and 
how beneficial for worldly life. 
 
NINTH POINT 

Actually following to the letter every aspect of the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices is 
only  bestowed  on  the  highest  of  the  elite.  If  it  is  not  possible  to  follow  them  in 
practice,  everyone  can  seek to  do  so by  intention,  purpose,  and  by  supporting  them 
and being biased towards them. In any event one is compelled to follow the obligatory 
and compulsory sorts. And even if there is no sin involved in giving up the practices 
which  are  ‘recommended’,  it  results  in  considerable  loss  of  merit.  And  if  they  are 
changed,  it  is  a  great  error.  When  the  practices  are followed  in  habitual  actions  and 
dealings,  such  acts  become  worship.  While  if  they  are  not  followed,  it  is  not  to  be 
reproved,  but  the  benefit  from  the  light  of  the  daily  conduct  of  God’s  Beloved 
(UWBP) is less. 

New  creations  in  the  ordinances  concerning  worship  are  innovation,  and  since 

innovations are opposed to the verse,  

This day have I completed for you your religion,(5:3) 

they are to be rejected.11 However, the recitations and invocations of the Sufi way are 
not innovations, on condition they originate in the Book and Sunna, and even if they 
differ  in  form  and  manner,  their  basis  and  principles  do  not  oppose  the  Prophet’s 
(UWBP) practices or change them, they are not innovations. Certainly some scholars 
classed  a  number  of  these  as  innovations,  but  called  them  “commendable 
innovations.”12  Imam-i  Rabbani,  the  Regenerator  of  the  Second  Millennium,  (May 
God be pleased with him) said:  

“On  my  spiritual  journeying,  I  saw  that  words  narrated  from  the  Noble 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) were luminous, shining with the rays 
of his practices. But when I  saw invocations and states  not narrated from him, there 
was no light on them, even if they were brilliant and powerful. The most brilliant of 
them was not equal to the least of the first sort. I understood from this that the rays of 
the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  practices  are  an  elixir.  Also,  for  those  seeking  light,  the 
practices are sufficient; there is no need to seek light outside them.” 

                                                 

11 See, Bukhari, I’tisam, 5; Buyu’, 60; Sulh, 5; Muslim, ‘Aqdiyya, 18; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 6. 
12 See, al-Iji, Kitab al-Mawaqif, i, 159; al-Ghazali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, ii, 256; Ibn Rajab, Jami‘ 

al-‘Ulum wa’l-Hikam, i, 267; Ibn ‘Abidin, Hashiyya, i, 390. 

 

90

This statement of such a hero of reality and the Shari‘a shows that the Prophet’s 
(UWBP)  practices  are  the  foundation  stone  of  the  happiness  of both  worlds  and  the 
source and spring of all attainment and perfection. 

O God! Bestow upon us the ability to follow the Illustrious Practices of the 
Prophet (UWBP). 
O  our  Sustainer!  We  believe  in  what  You  have  revealed  to  Your  Prophet; 
then write us down among those who bear witness.(3:53) 

 
TENTH POINT 

The verse, 

Say: “If you do love God, follow me: God will love you(3:31) 

displays a miraculous conciseness, for many phrases are included in its three phrases. 
It is as follows: 

The  verse  says:  “If  you  believe  in  God  (May  His  Glory  be  exalted),  you  will 
surely love Him. Since you love God, you will act in the manner He loves. To do that, 
you  must  resemble  the one  God  loves,  and  he  may  be  resembled by  following  him. 
Whenever you follow him, God will love you too. Anyway you have to love God so 
that He shall love you.” 

These  phrases  express  only  a  brief  and  concise  meaning  of  the  verse.  It  means 
that man’s most exalted goal is to receive Almighty God’s love. The verse shows that 
this  may  be  achieved  by  following  God’s  Beloved  (UWBP)  and  his  practices.  If  at 
this stage three points are proved, the above truth will become completely clear. 

F i r s t  P o i n t : Man was created with an infinite innate love for the universe’s 
Creator. For included in his nature are a love of beauty, an ardour for perfection, and 
passion  for  bestowal.  His  love  increases  proportionately  to  the  degrees  of  beauty, 
perfection, and bestowal, reaching the furthest degrees of ecstatic ardour. 

Furthermore, tiny man’s tiny heart may hold a love as great as the universe. Yes, 
the fact that writings equivalent to a library of thousands of books may be inscribed in 
the faculty of memory, which is a coffer of the heart’s the size of a lentil, shows that 
the human heart may contain the universe and bear love that great. 

Since  inherent  in  human  nature  is  such  an  infinite  capacity  to  love  bestowal, 
beauty,  and  perfection;  and  since  the  universe’s  Creator  possesses  infinite  sacred 
beauty, the existence of which is self-evidently established by His works apparent in 
the universe; and since He possesses infinite holy perfection, the existence of which is 
necessarily proved by the embroideries of His art to be seen in beings; and since He is 
the owner of  

 

91

infinite bounties, the existence of which is certainly, indeed, self-evidently established 
by  the  infinite  varieties  of  His  bestowal  and  bounties  to  be  observed  in  living 
creatures; 
the  most 
comprehensive,  the  most  needy,  the  most  thoughtful,  and  the  most  yearning  of 
conscious beings. 

love  from  man,  who 

these  surely  demand 

infinite 

is 

Indeed, all human beings are capable of infinite love for the All-Glorious Creator, 
and in the face of His beauty, perfection, and bestowal, the Creator is more deserving 
of  love  than  anyone.  All  the  varieties  of  love  and  intense  attachment  a  believing 
human being has for his life, immortality, and existence, his world, his self, and other 
beings,  are  mere  droplets  of  his  capacity  to  love  God. His  various  intense  emotions 
are transformations of that capacity to love, and distillations of it in other forms. It is 
clear that just as man takes pleasure at his own happiness, so he receives pleasure at 
the  happiness  of  others  to whom  he  is  attached.  And  just  as  he  loves  someone  who 
saves  him  from  disaster,  so  he  loves  someone  who  saves  those  he  loves.  In 
consequence  of  this  mental  attitude,  if  a  person  thinks  only  of  this  out  of  all  the 
varieties of divine bounties bestowed on all men, he will say:  

My Creator saved me from non-existence, which is eternal darkness, and gave me 
a beautiful world like this one. Then when the time comes for me to die, He will again 
save  me from non-existence,  which  is  eternal extinction,  and  from  annihilation,  and 
bestow on me in an eternal realm an everlasting and truly magnificent world. And just 
as  He  has  bestowed  on  me  external  and  inner  senses  and  feelings  with  which  to 
benefit  from  all  the  varieties  of  delights  and  good  things  of  the  world  and  to  roam 
around  it  and  make  excursions,  so  He  bestows  innumerable  bounties  on  all  my 
relatives and friends and fellow-men, all of whom I love and to whom I am attached. 
Those bounties  are also mine  in a way, because I am happy and receive pleasure at 
their  happiness. Since  in accordance with the rule, ‘Man  is the slave of bestowal,’13 
everyone in a sense worships benevolence, certainly in the face of such innumerable 
favours,  since  I  have  a  heart  as  great  as  the  universe,  it  necessitates  its  being  filled 
with  love  at  those  favours,  and  I  want  to  fill  it.  If  in  fact  I  am  unable  to  love  that 
much, I can do so potentially, by intention, belief, acceptance, appreciation, longing, 
taking the part of, and by will. And so on. 

Analogies  may  be  drawn  with  the  love  for  bestowal we  have  briefly  alluded to 
here for the love man feels for beauty and perfection. As for the unbelievers, they are 
infinitely  hostile  because  of  their  unbelief,  and  even  bear  a  wrongful  and  insulting 
enmity towards the universe and all beings. 

                                                 

13 Abu Nu’aym, Hilya al-Awliya’, iv, 121; al-Bayhaqi, Shu’ab al-Iman, i, 381; Khatib al-

Baghdadi, iv, 276, vii, 346; al-Hakim al-Tirmidhi, Nawadir al-Usul, i, 149. 

 

92

S  e  c  o  n  d    P  o  i  n  t  :  Love  of  God  necessitates  following  the  Practices  of 
Muhammad  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace).  For  to  love  God  is  to  do  what 
pleases  Him,  and  the  things  that  please  Him  are  manifested  in  most  perfect  form  in 
the person of Muhammad (UWBP). There are two ways of resembling Muhammad’s 
(UWBP) actions and deeds: 

The  First:  Obeying  Almighty  God’s  commands  in  respect  of  loving  Him  and 
within  the  bounds  of  what  pleases  Him  necessitates  following  them,  for  the  most 
perfect leader in such matters is the person of Muhammad (UWBP). 

The Second: Since the person of Muhammad (UWBP) is the chief means of man 
receiving  innumerable  divine  favours,  he  is  surely  worthy  of  boundless  love  for the 
sake of Almighty God. If man is capable of resembling someone he loves, by nature 
he  wants  to  do  so.  This  definitely  necessitates  that  those  who  love  God’s  Beloved 
(UWBP) try to resemble him by following his illustrious practices. 

T h i r d  P o i n t : Almighty God has boundless  love,  just as  He has infinite 
compassion.  Just  as  He  makes  Himself  loved  in  infinite  fashion  through  all  the  fine 
qualities  and  adornment  of  the  creatures  in  the  universe,  so  He  loves  in  particular 
conscious beings who respond with love to His making His artefacts loved. It may be 
clearly understood how important and exalted an aim it is to try to attract the love of 
the  Being  one  manifestation  of  whose  mercy  are  all  the  subtle  wonders  and  good 
things and delights and bounties of Paradise. Since it is stated clearly that His love is 
won  only  through  following  Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  practices,  it  is  certain  that  it 
should be man’s greatest aim and his most urgent duty. 
 
ELEVENTH POINT 

This consists of three matters. 
F i r s t  M a t t e r : The sources of the Noble Messenger’s (UWBP) illustrious 
practices  are  threefold:  his  words,  his  acts,  and  his  conduct.  And  each  of  these  has 
three categories: obligatory, voluntary, and laudable. 

It is imperative to follow those that are obligatory and compulsory, and penalties 
and punishment are incurred for giving them up. Everyone is charged with following 
them. As for the voluntary sort, as a means of winning God’s love, the believers are 
again charged with following them, but they receive no penalty if they fail to do so. 
However,  to  act  in  accordance  with  them  and  to follow  them  is  highly  meritorious, 
while  to  change  them  is  innovation,  misguidance,  and  a  great  error.  To  emulate the 
Prophet’s  (UWBP)  customary  actions  is  extremely  laudable  and  in  accordance  with 
wisdom, and is beneficial for both personal life and social life and for  

 

93

humankind.  For  all  his  habitual  actions  produce  numerous  things  beneficial  for life, 
and furthermore, by following them, such conduct and actions become worship. 

Yes,  since  as  both  friend  and  foe  agree,  the  person  of  Muhammad  (UWBP) 
manifested the highest degrees of moral virtues; and since as all are agreed, he is the 
most famous and excellent member of the human race; and since as is indicated by his 
thousands of miracles, and testified to by the World of Islam that he founded and its 
achievements,  and  is  affirmed  by  the  truths  of  the  Qur’an,  which  he  heralded  and 
interpreted,  he  was  the  most  excellent  Perfect  Man  and  most  excellent  guide;  and 
since as the fruit of following him, millions of the people of perfection have advanced 
through the degrees of attainment and reached the happiness of both worlds; for sure 
his practices and actions are the finest examples to be followed, and the safest guides, 
and the soundest laws to be adopted as principles. Happy the person who has a large 
share of following the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices. While those who are lazy and do 
not  follow  them  suffer  vast  loss,  and  those  who  consider  them  to  be  unimportant 
commit  a  great  crime,  while  if they  criticize them,  which  infers  denying  them,  it  is 
serious misguidance.14 

S e c o n d  M a t t e r : Almighty God decrees in the All-Wise Qur’an, 
And you [stand] on an exalted standard of character.(68:4) 
According  to  sound  narrations,  when  the  distinguished  Companion  ‘A’isha  the 
Veracious (May God be pleased with her) described the Messenger (Upon whom be 
blessings and peace), she would say: “His character is the Qur’an.”15 That is to say, 
Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings and peace) is the exemplar of the  fine moral 
qualities  described  by  the  Qur’an.  He  conforms  to  them  more  than  anyone,  and  his 
nature was created in accordance with them. 

So even lunatics would understand how unfortunate are those heedless members 
of his community who believe in him yet give no importance to his practices or want 
to change them, despite each of his deeds, states, words, and actions being worthy of 
emulation by mankind. 

T h i r d  M a t t e r : Since the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and 
peace)  was  created  with  the  most  moderate  character  in  the  most  perfect  form,  his 
actions and rest all proceeded on moderation and  

                                                 

Musnad, ii, 361. 

14 See, Bukhari, I‘tisam, 2; Ahkam, 1; Jihad, 109; Muslim, ‘Imara, 33; Nasa’i, Bay’at; 27; 

15 Muslim, Salat al-Musafirin, 139; Abu Da’ud, Tatawwu‘, 26; Nasa’i, Tatawwu‘, 2; Musnad, vi, 

54, 91, 163, 188, 216; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, v, 170; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, i, 345; iv, 112. 

 

94

equanimity.16 His biography shows clearly that he always acted with moderation and 
equanimity, and avoided excess and negligence. 

Yes,  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  conformed 

completely to the command: 

Therefore stand firm [in the Straight Way] as you are commanded,(11:112)  

and moderation is apparent in all his acts, words, and conduct. For example, since his 
reasoning faculty was free of wiliness and stupidity, which are excess and deficiency 
–  resembling  its  corruption  and  darkness,  it  always  functioned  with  wisdom,  the 
middle way and means of moderation. Similarly, far from rage and cowardice, which 
are the corruption of the power of anger and its excess and deficiency, his power of 
anger was always employed with sacred courage, which is the middle way and means 
of  moderation  of  that  power.  And  so  too,  purified  of  licentiousness  and  frigidity, 
which  are  the  excess  and  deficiency  of  the  power  of  animal  appetites  and  its 
corruption, his power of passion always took chasteness, the means of moderation of 
that  power,  as  guide,  at  the  degree  of  maximum  virtuousness.  And  so on.  In  all  his 
practices, daily  conduct, and in carrying out the  injunctions of his Shari‘a, he chose 
the  way  of  moderation  and  avoided  excess  and  deficiency,  and  wastefulness  and 
prodigality, which are wrongdoing and darkness. He avoided wastefulness absolutely 
and  took  frugality  as  his  guide  in  his  speech  even,  and  in  eating  and  drinking. 
Thousands  of  books  have  been  written  describing  the  details  of  this  truth.  In 
accordance with “A hint is enough for the wise,” we make do with this drop from the 
ocean and cut the story short here. 

O  God,  grant  blessings  to  he  who  brought  together  in  his  person  all  fine 
moral  qualities,  and  manifested  the  mystery  of,  “And  you  [stand]  on  an 
exalted  standard  of  character,”  and  who  said:  “Whoever  adheres  to  my 
practices  when  my  community  is  corrupted  shall  receive  the  reward  of  a 
hundred martyrs.” 
And they shall say: “Praise be to God, who has guided us to this [felicity]; 
never  could  we  have  found  guidance,  had  it  not  been  for  the  guidance  of 
God;  indeed  it  was  the  truth  that  the  prophets  of  our  Sustainer  brought  to 
us.”(7:43) 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, x, 314. 

16 See, Musnad, vi, 68, 155; al-Tayalisi, al-Musnad, 49; Abu Ya’la, al-Musnad, iv, 478; al-

 

95

The Twelfth Flash 

 
 

 

[This explains two fine points related to the Qur’an, and was written 
in connection with two minor questions put by Re’fet Bey.1]  

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

 
Peace be upon you, and on your brothers, and God’s mercy and blessings! 
My Dear, Loyal Brother, Re’fet Bey, 
Your  questions  at  this  difficult  time  put  me  in  a  difficult  position.  On  this 
occasion they  are both unimportant, but they did seem to me to be significant since 
they are related to two points of the Qur’an and your question about the globe of the 
earth touches on criticisms about the seven levels of the earth and the heavens made 
by  geography  and  astronomy.  So  disregarding  the  unimportant  nature  of  the 
questions,  I  shall  explain  two  fine  points  about  two  verses  of  the  Qur’an,  in  a 
scholarly and general way. 
 
FIRST TOPIC 

This consists of two points. 
F i r s t  P o i n t : According to the verses, 

How many are the creatures that carry not their own sustenance? It is God 
who  feeds  [both]  them  and  you.(29:60)  *  For  God  is  He  who  gives  [all] 
sustenance – Lord of Power, Steadfast [for ever],(51:58) 

sustenance is  supervised by the All-Powerful One of Glory and comes directly  from 
the treasury of His mercy. Since the sustenance of all living creatures is guaranteed by 
the Sustainer, none should die of hunger.  

                                                 

1 Re’fet Barutçu, 1886-1975. He first visited Bediuzzaman in Barla in 1931 and thereafter became 
one of his close students, serving prison sentences together with him in Eskişehir and Denizli. He was a 
retired yüzbaşı (captain) in the army. 

 

96

Whereas apparently many do die of it and of lack of food. This  is a  fact on the one 
hand and a mystery on the other, and may be solved as follows: 

The Sustainer’s guarantee is true; none die of hunger. For that All-Wise One of 
Glory stores up some of the food He sends to the bodies of living creatures as fat, as 
reserves. In fact, He stores up a part of the  sustenance  He sends to each cell,  in the 
cell, like a reserve stock to be spent when no food comes from outside. The creatures 
die before the store is finished. That is to say, death in such cases is not from lack of 
sustenance;  the  creatures  die  from  mistakenly  acquired  habits  and  due  to  illness 
resulting from the desire for the wrong things and the giving up of habit. 

Yes, the natural sustenance stored up in the bodies of living creatures in the form 
of fat generally lasts perfectly well for forty days. It may even last twice that long in 
cases  of  illness  or  certain  ecstatic  states.  It  was  written  in  the  newspapers  thirteen 
years ago (and now it is thirty-nine) that out of extreme stubbornness, a man in prison 
in London managed to live quite healthily for seventy days eating nothing at all. 

Since the natural sustenance lasts from forty days to seventy or eighty; and since 
the manifestation of the divine name of Provider is apparent on the face of the earth 
truly  extensively;  and  since  foods  flow  forth  from  breasts  and  from  wood  even  in 
completely  unexpected  fashion;  if  man  so  full  of  evil  does  not  interfere  with  his 
mistaken choices and confuse things, that name comes to the assistance of the living 
creature before the natural sustenance is consumed, preventing death from starvation. 
In which case, if those who die of hunger do so in less than forty days, it is definitely 
not from lack of sustenance. Rather, in accordance with the saying, “the abandoning 
of habit is  fatal,” it occurs either from a bad habit or from illness resulting  from the 
giving up of habits. In which case it may be said that there is no death from hunger. 

Indeed,  observedly,  sustenance  is  in  inverse  proportion  to  power  and  will.  For 
example, when still  in the womb,  young are completely deprived of power and will 
yet are fed to repletion. Then when they come into the world they still lack power and 
will,  but  since  they  have  some  sort  of  ability  and potential  senses,  needing  only  to 
fasten their mouths to the breast, the most perfect, nutritious and easily digestible food 
is given to their mouths from those fountains, in the gentlest form and strangest way. 
Then  as  they  acquire  a  little  amount  of  power  and  will,  that  readily  available,  fine 
food  starts  to be  withdrawn  from them.  The  fountains  of  the breasts  dry  up  and the 
infants’  food  is  sent  from  elsewhere.  However,  since  their  power  and  will  are  still 
insufficient to search for it, so the Munificent Provider sends their parents’ tenderness 
and compassion to assist them. Whenever  

 

97

their power and will are perfected, then their sustenance does not hasten to them and 
is not made to do so. The sustenance remains in its place, saying: “Come and search 
for me and take me!” That is to say, sustenance is in inverse proportion to power and 
will. We have  indeed explained in many parts of the Risale-i Nur that animals most 
lacking in will and power are better nourished and live better than those with greater 
will and power. 

S e c o n d   P o i n t : There are different sorts of possibility,  like reasonable 
possibility,  customary  possibility,  and  ordinary  possibility.  If  an  event  is  not within 
the bounds of reasonable possibility, it is rejected, and if it is not within the bounds of 
customary possibility, it is a miracle but may not easily be wonder-working. If there is 
nothing similar to it, either according to common usage or in principle, it can only be 
accepted through a categorical proof as clear as witnessing. 

In consequence of this, the extraordinary states of Sayyid Ahmad Badawi,2 who 
for forty days refrained from eating bread even, are within the bounds of customary 
possibility. It may have been both wonder-working and an habitual practice out of the 
ordinary.  Yes,  there  are  numerous  unanimous  reports  concerning  Sayyid  Ahmad 
Badawi’s (May his mystery be sanctified) wondrous states and absorption in ecstasy. 
On  occasion,  he  ate  only  once  in  forty  days,  but he  did  not  do  that  all  the  time;  he 
achieved it sometimes as an instance of wonder-working. It possibly became a habit 
for him because he did not feel the need to eat while in a state of ecstasy. Wonders of 
this sort have been reliably  narrated about many  saints of his kind. As we proved in 
the first Point, stored-up sustenance remains undepleted for more than forty days, and 
it is possible not to eat for that length of time through habit, and such a state has been 
reliably  reported  about  people  who  were  out  of  the  ordinary.  It  therefore  cannot  be 
denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

2 Sayyid Ahmad Badawi (d. 675/1276). He was born in Morocco and eventually settled in Tanta 

in Egypt. He is famous as one of the four Spiritual Poles whose saintly powers persisted after their 
deaths. 

 

98

Two  important  matters  will  be  explained  in  connection  with  the 
second  question,  for  the  sciences  of  geography  and  astronomy  have 
criticized the  verse and foolishly  even tried to deny  it, because with 
their abbreviated laws and narrow principles and tiny scales they have 
been  unable  to  ascend  to  the  heavens  of  the  Qur’an,  and  have  been 
unable  to  discover  the  seven  levels  of  meanings  in  the  stars  of  its 
verses. 

 
FIRST IMPORTANT MATTER 

This is about the earth having seven levels like the heavens. This matter appears 
to the philosophers of the present time to be untrue; their sciences about the earth and 
heavens find it unacceptable, and making it a pretext, they oppose some of the truths 
of the Qur’an. We shall point out concisely a few points about this. 

T  h  e    F  i  r  s t :  Firstly,  the  verse’s  meaning  is  one  thing  and  the  parts  of  the 
meaning  and  points  confirming  it,  another.  The  meaning  cannot be denied  if  one  of 
the  many  parts  of  the  universal  meaning  is  absent.  Of  the  numerous  parts  of  the 
universal meaning concerning the seven levels of the heavens and seven layers of the 
earth, seven points confirming it are clearly apparent. 

Secondly, the verse does not explicitly state that “the earth has seven layers.” The 

apparent meaning of the verse is, 

God is He Who created seven heavens and of the earth what is similar... [to 
the end of the verse]:(65:12) 

“He  created  the  earth  like  the  seven  heavens,  and  made  it  a  dwelling  place  for  His 
creatures.” It does not say: I created it in seven levels. Its being similar is in regard to 
createdness and being the habitation of creatures. 

T h e  S e c o n d : The globe of the earth is certainly very small in relation to the 
heavens, but as the exhibition, display, gathering place and centre of countless divine 
artefacts,  as  the  heart  and  immaterial  centre  of  the  vast,  endless  heavens,  it  is 
equivalent  to  them,  like  the  heart  may  be  seen  as  equivalent  to  the  body.  For  this 
reason,  the  earth  having  seven3  climes,  as  was  supposed  from  early  times;  also  the 
well-known  seven  continents,  Europe,  Africa,  Oceania,  the  two  Asias,  and  the  two 
America’s;  also  together  with  the  seas,  the  East,  West,  North,  and  South,  the  well-
known seven regions of this face and on the face of the New World; also the  

                                                 

3 The seven repetitions of the word seven here makes a fine ‘coincidence’ (T. tevâfuk; Ar. 

tawafuq). 

 

99

various, contiguous seven  levels  from the centre to the outer crust, which  have been 
established  by  science;  and  the  famous  seven  universal  elements  called  the  seven 
levels, which comprise the seventy simple elements that are the means of perpetuating 
animate creatures’ lives; also the four elements of water, air, fire, and earth, together 
with the animal, vegetable,  and mineral  kingdoms, making seven  levels and realms; 
also  the  seven  realms  of  the  earth  verified  by  those  who  uncover  the  secrets  of 
creation  and  the  people  of  witnessing,  who  are  very  numerous,  their  testimony  that 
they are the worlds and  habitations of  jinns, demons, and other  various sentient and 
living  creatures;  also  the  seven  levels  indicating  that  seven  further  globes  exist 
resembling our globe, and that they are the dwelling places of living creatures – from 
these indications it has been understood from verses of the Qur’an that the earth too 
has seven levels. 

It  thus  becomes  clear  that  the  earth  has  seven  sorts  of  levels  that  exist  in  seven 
ways. The eighth, which is the final meaning, is important from another point of view; 
it is not included in the seven. 

T  h  e    T  h  i  r  d  :  Since  the  Absolutely  Wise  One  wastes  nothing  and  creates 
nothing  in  vain;  and  since  creatures  exist  for  conscious  beings  and  find  their 
perfection by means of conscious beings and rejoice through them and are saved from 
futility  by  means  of  them;  and  since  observedly  the  Absolutely  Wise  One,  the  All-
Powerful One of Glory, fills the element of air, and world of water, and layer of earth 
with innumerable living beings; and since just as air and water are not an obstacle to 
the movement of animals, so dense matter like earth and stone do not form obstacles 
to  the  passage  of  matter  like  electricity  and  X-rays;  for  sure  the  All-Wise  One  of 
Glory, the Undying Maker, will not leave empty and uninhabited the broad spaces and 
worlds  and  caves  and  seven  contiguous  layers  from  the  centre  of  our  globe  to  the 
outer crust, which is our habitation and centre. He has certainly populated them and 
created  and  settled  there  conscious  beings  appropriate  to  those  worlds.  Since  those 
sentient creatures must be angels  and spirit beings of a sort, the densest and hardest 
layer even will be to them as the sea  is to fish and the air  is to birds. The awesome 
heat at the centre of the earth even must be for those conscious creatures like the sun’s 
heat is for us. Created from light, for those sentient spirit beings fire is like light. 

T h e  F o u r t h : Mentioned in the Eighteenth Letter is a comparison about the 
depictions  made  by  the  people of  illumination  of  the  strange  wonders of  the  earth’s 
levels, which are outside the bounds of reason. A summary is this: 

In the Manifest Realm the globe is a seed, while in the World of Similitudes and 

Intermediate Realm it is so vast as to be equal to the heavens. If  

 

100

the people of illumination  have seen a level of the earth particular to demons which 
has a breadth of a thousand years, it is not in the seed of the earth that pertains to the 
Manifest  World;  but  is  a  manifestation  of  its  branches  and  levels  in  the  World  of 
Similitudes.  Since  an  apparently  insignificant  level  of  the  earth  has  such  a  vast 
manifestation in another world, surely it may be said that it has seven levels which are 
the equivalent of the seven  levels of the  heavens. In order to call to mind the above 
points, the Qur’an’s verses allude to them by showing in a miraculously concise way 
that the tiny earth is the equivalent of the seven levels of the heavens. 
 
SECOND IMPORTANT MATTER 

The seven heavens and the earth and all that is in them extols and glorifies 
Him  [to  the  end  of  the  verse](17:44)  *  And  has  applied  His  design  to  the 
heavens and fashioned them into seven heavens, and He has full knowledge 
of all things.(2:29) 

Numerous verses like these depict the  heavens  as sevenfold. It is appropriate to 
write here only a summary of this matter, which of necessity we expounded extremely 
briefly  in  the  commentary  Isharat  al-I’jaz  (Signs  of  Miraculousness),  while  on  the 
front in the first year of Great War. It is as follows: 

Ancient philosophy conceived of the heavens as being nine in number; accepting 
in the tongue of the Shari‘a the throne of God and seat of God together with the seven 
heavens,  they  depicted  the  heavens  in  strange  manner.  The  glittering  terms  of  the 
philosophers  held  mankind  under  their  sway  for  many  centuries.  In  fact,  many 
Qur’anic  commentators  were  compelled  to  make  the  apparent  meanings  of  verses 
conform to their school. In this way the All-Wise Qur’an’s miraculousness was veiled 
to  an  extent.  As  for  the  new  philosophy,  called  modern  science,  in  the  face  of  the 
excesses  of  ancient  philosophy  about  the  heavens  it  went  to  the  other  extreme  and 
quite simply denied the heavens’ existence. The former went to excess and the latter 
was deficient; they were unable to portray reality in its entirety. 

As  for  the  sacred  wisdom of  the  All-Wise  Qur’an,  it  left  aside  such  excess  and 
deficiency, and choosing the middle way said that the All-Glorious Maker created the 
seven  levels  of  the  heavens.  The  planets  swim  in  the  heavens  like  fish  and  glorify 
God. It says in a Hadith: “The skies are waves held back.”4 That is, the heavens are an 
ocean the waves of which are stationary.   

                                                 

Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, viii, 132. 

4 Tirmidhi, Tafsir Sura 58, 1; Musnad, ii, 370; al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwadhi, No: 3352; al-

 

101

We shall prove this Qur’anic truth extremely briefly with rules and seven aspects 

of meaning. 

First Rule: It is established by science and philosophy that limitless space is not 

an infinite vacuum, but is filled with matter called ether. 

The Second: It is established by science and reason, indeed by observation, that a 
matter  which fills  space  is  the  bond of  the  laws  governing  the  heavenly  bodies  like 
those of attraction and repulsion, and is the conductor and transmitter of such forces 
in matter as light, heat, and electricity. 

The  Third:  It  has  been  established  empirically that  while  remaining  as  ether, it 
has various forms and formations like other matter. Just as there are three states of the 
same  matter,  liquid,  gas  and  solid,  for  instance,  steam,  water,  and  ice;  so  there  is 
nothing  to  reasonably  prevent  ether  having  seven  states  or  levels;  it  cannot  be 
objected to in any way. 

The Fourth: If the heavenly bodies are studied carefully, it will be seen that there 
is a difference in the levels. The level that contains the vast nebular sphere called the 
Milky  Way of course does not resemble the  level of the fixed stars. It  is as  if those 
stars have ripened and matured like the fruits of summer, while the uncountable stars 
apparent  in  the  form  of  a  cloud  in  the  Milky  Way  are  constantly  emerging  and 
beginning  to  mature.  According  to  accurate  conjecture,  the  level  of  fixed  stars  also 
appears different to the level of the solar system. And so on. One may adduce seven 
systems and seven levels which differ from one another. 

The  Fifth:  It  is  established  by  conjecture,  sense,  inductive  reasoning,  and 
experience that  if a material  is  given order and form and if other artefacts are made 
from the material, it is transformed into various levels and forms. For example, when 
a  diamond  mine  is  worked,  from  the  material,  ashes,  coal,  and  diamonds  are 
produced.  And  when  fire  is  lit,  it  separates  into  the  levels  of  flame,  smoke,  and 
embers. And when water and oxygen are combined, levels like water, ice, and steam 
are  formed.  That  is  to  say,  when  a  single  substance  is  worked,  it  may separate into 
levels.  In  which  case,  when  Creative  Power  started  to  work  in  the  substance  called 
ether,  in  accordance  with  the  verse,  “And  fashioned  them  into  seven  heavens,”  it 
created from it seven sorts of heavens as differing levels. 

The Sixth: The above indications necessarily indicate both the existence, and the 
plurality, of the heavens. Since the heavens are certainly numerous, and the Bringer of 
Sure  News  (UWBP)  stated  in  the  tongue  of  the  Qur’an  that  they  number  seven,  for 
sure they are seven. 

The  Seventh:  Since  in  Arabic,  terms  like  seven,  seventy,  and  seven  hundred 

express multiplicity, those universal seven levels may comprise multiple levels. 

 

102

I n  S h o r t : The All-Powerful One of Glory created the seven  heavens from 
ether, and forming it into levels, ordered it with a truly fine and wondrous order and 
sowed  the  stars  in  it.  Since  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  is  a  pre-eternal 
address speaking to all the classes of all mankind and the jinn, for sure each of those 
classes  will  receive  its  share  from  the  Qur’an’s  verses  and  its  verses  will  contain 
various and numerous meanings, both explicit and implicit, in a way that will satisfy 
the understanding of each. 

Yes,  the  breadth  of  the  Qur’anic  address  and  the  comprehensiveness  of  its 
meanings  and  indications  and  its  conforming  to  and  flattering  all  the  degrees  of 
understanding from  the  most  uneducated  common  people  to  the  highest  of  the  elite 
shows  that  all  its  verses  have  an  aspect  which  looks  to  each  class.  Thus,  in 
consequence  of  this  mystery,  as  an  example,  seven  classes  of  men  understand  as 
follows  the  meaning  of  seven  various  levels  from  the  universal  meaning  “seven 
heavens:”  

A  short-sighted  and  narrow-minded  class  of  men  understands  the  atmosphere 
from the verse “and fashioned them into seven heavens.” While another class of men 
befogged  by  astronomy  understands  the  famous  stars  known  popularly  as  the  seven 
planets,  and  their  orbits.  Yet  another  group  understands  seven  celestial  globes 
resembling  our  globe,  which  are  inhabited  by  living  creatures.5  A  further  group  of 
men understands the solar system being separated into seven  levels, and seven  solar 
systems together with our system. And yet another group undertands the ether being 
separated  into  seven  levels.  Another  class  of  men  with  broader  ideas  counts  all  the 
visible  skies  gilded with stars as a  heaven, and saying that  it is this world’s heaven, 
understands that there are six levels of heavens besides it. And mankind’s seventh and 
highest class do not consider the seven heavens to be restricted to the Manifest World, 
and understands that the Worlds of the Hereafter and the Unseen, and this world, and 
the World of Similitudes all  have seven heavens, each of which  is an  encompassing 
container and roof. 

Similarly,  there  are  many  further  particular  meanings  in  the  universal  of  the 
verse,  like  the  above-mentioned  seven  levels  of  meaning  of  the  seven  levels. 
Everyone  receives  his  share  according  to  his  understanding  and  everyone  finds  his 
sustenance at that heavenly table. 

Since  the  verse  has  thus  numerous  points  confirming  it,  the  unreasoning 
philosophers and foolish astronomers attacking the verse in that way on the pretext of 
denying the heavens is like silly children throwing stones at a  

                                                 

5 See, al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 535; al-Tabari, Jami‘ al-Bayan, xxviii, 153-4. 

 

103

star in the hope of making it fall. Because if one of the points confirming it from the 
verse’s  universal  meaning  is  correct,  the  universal  meaning  is  correct  and  true.  A 
particular even which is not literally true but is commonly accepted may be included 
in the universal meaning in order to conform to the generally held ideas. Whereas we 
saw  numerous  particulars  which  are  right  and  true.  Now  look  at  this  unfair,  unjust 
geography  and  drunken  intoxicated  astronomy:  how  wrong these  two  sciences  have 
been, closing their eyes to the universal meaning, which is right and correct and true, 
and not seeing the aspects which confirm it and are absolutely right; they have fancied 
an imaginary and extraordinary particular to be the meaning of the verse and thrown 
stones at the verse! And they have broken their own heads and lost their belief! 

I n  S h o r t : Since like jinns and satans, unbelieving materialist ideas have been 
unable to ascend to the seven levels of the skies of the Qur’an, which was revealed in 
seven  recitations,6  and  with  seven  aspects,  seven  sorts  of  miraculousness,  seven 
truths, and seven pillars, they do not know what there is and what there is not in the 
stars of its verses and give false and inaccurate reports. So falling stars like the above 
discussion descend on their heads from the stars of those verses and scorch them. Yes, 
the  heavens  of  the  Qur’an  cannot  be  ascended  to  by  means  of the  jinn-like  ideas  of 
philosophy. The stars of its verses can only be risen to through the ascension of true 
wisdom and the wings of belief and Islam. 

O God! Grant blessings to the Sun of the skies of prophethood and Moon of 
the  firmament  of  messengerhood,  and  to  his  Family  and  Companions,  the 
stars of guidance for the rightly-guided. 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 
O  God!  O  Sustainer  of  the  Heavens  and  Earth!  Adorn  the  hearts  of  the 
translator of this treatise and his companions with the stars of the truths of 
the Qur’an and belief. Amen. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

Qira’at, 2. 

6 See, Bukhari, Fada’il al-Qur’an, 5, 27; Tawhid, 553; Muslim, Salat al-musafirin, 270: Tirmidhi, 

 

104

The Thirteenth Flash 

 
This, the Thirteenth Flash, explains the meaning of 
“I seek refuge with God from Satan the Accursed” 

 
 

 

[This  is  about  seeking  refuge  with  God  from  Satan.  Thirteen 
indications  will  be  written.  Some  of  them  have  been  explained  and 
proved in various places in the Twenty-Sixth Word and other parts of 
the Risale-i Nur so here will be discussed only briefly.] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
And say: O My Sustainer, I seek refuge with You from the whisperings of the 
Evil Ones, * And I seek refuge with you, my Sustainer, lest they should come 
near me.(23:97-8) 

 
FIRST INDICATION 

Q u e s t i o n : Although evil spirits do not interfere in the universe in any way in 
regard to creation; and through His mercy and favour Almighty God takes the part of 
the  people  of  truth;  and  the  attractive  beauties  and  virtues  of  truth  and  reality 
strengthen  and  encourage  the  people  of  truth,  and  the  repulsive  ugliness  of 
misguidance revolts the people of misguidance;  what  is the reason  for Satan’s party 
very  often  gaining  the  upper  hand;  what  is  the  wisdom  in  it?  And  why  should  the 
people of truth always seek refuge with God from Satan’s evil? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  The  wisdom  and  purpose  is  this:  for  the  most  part, 
misguidance and evil are negative, destructive, and pertain to non-existence. While in 
the  great  majority  of  cases,  guidance  and  good  are  positive,  constructive,  repairing, 
and  pertain  to  existence.  Everyone  knows  that  one  man  can  destroy  in  one  day  a 
building constructed by  twenty  men  in  twenty  days.  Yes,  a  person  continues  to  live 
due  to  the  existence  of  all  the  basic  members  and  conditions  of  life,  life  being 
particular  to  the  All-Glorious  Creator’s  power;  yet,  by  severing  a  member  a  tyrant 
may make  

 

105

the person manifest death, which is non-being in relation to life. Therefore, the saying 
“Destruction is easy” has become proverbial. 

In consequence, the people of misguidance sometimes triumph over the people of 
truth, who are very powerful, with what is in reality a weak force. But the people of 
truth  possess  a  stronghold  so  unassailable  that  when  they  take  refuge  in  it,  those 
fearsome  enemies  cannot  draw  close;  they  can  do  nothing.  If  they  cause  some 
temporary harm, according to the verse,  

And the end is [best] for the righteous,(7:128, etc.) 

everlasting reward and profit make up for the damage. That impregnable stronghold, 
that fortified citadel, is the Shari‘a of Muhammad (UWBP) and his practices. 
 
SECOND INDICATION 

Q u e s t i o n : The creation of devils, who are pure evil, and their harassing the 
people of belief, and many people not believing  and going to Hell because of them, 
appears  to  be  terrible  and  ugly.  How  does  the  mercy  and  beauty  of  the  Absolutely 
Beauteous One, the Absolutely  Compassionate One, the Truly Merciful One, permit 
this  infinite  ugliness  and  awesome  calamity?  Many  people  have  asked  about  this 
question, and it occurs to many people. 

T h e  A n s w e r : In addition to the minor evils, there are numerous universal 
good purposes in the existence of Satan, and human attainments and perfections. Yes, 
however  many the  degrees  from a  seed  to the  huge  tree, the  degrees in  the  abilities 
lodged in human nature are more numerous. They range from a minute particle to the 
sun. For these abilities and potentialities to develop, action is required, a transaction is 
necessary. In such a transaction the action of the mechanism of progress is triggered 
through striving. And striving occurs due to the existence of evil spirits and harmful 
things.  Otherwise  man’s  station  would  have  been  constant  like  that  of  the  angels; 
there  would  have  been  no  classes  in  humankind,  which  resembles  thousands  of 
species. It is contrary to wisdom and justice to abandon a thousand instances of good 
so as to avoid one minor evil. 

For  sure  the  majority  of  people  embrace  misguidance  due  to  Satan,  but 
importance and value look mostly to quality; they look to quantity little or not at all. If 
someone has a thousand and ten seeds which he buries, and under the earth the seeds 
undergo a chemical reaction as a result of which ten become trees and a thousand rot, 
the  profit  the  man  receives  from  the  ten  seeds  which  have  become  trees  certainly 
eliminates the loss he suffers from the thousand rotted ones. In exactly the same way, 
through the struggle against the soul and Satan, the profit, honour, enlightenment, and 
value  

 

106

for  humankind  gained  by  ten  perfect  men,  who  are  like  stars,  certainly  reduce  to 
nothing  the  harm  caused  to  mankind  through  the  people  of  misguidance  embracing 
unbelief, who are so base as to be considered vermin. Since this is so, divine mercy, 
wisdom, and justice have permitted the existence of Satan, and allowed him to molest 
men. 

O people of belief! Your armour against this awesome enemy is the fear of God 
fashioned on the workbench of the Qur’an, and your shield is the Noble Messenger’s 
(UWBP)  practices,  and  your  weapon,  seeking  refuge  with  God  from  Satan,  and 
seeking forgiveness, and taking refuge in divine protection. 
 
THIRD INDICATION 

Q  u  e  s  t  i  o  n  :  The  very  great  complaints  and  massing  of  forces  against  the 
people  of  misguidance  in  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  does  not  appear  to  the  reason  to  be 
conformable with its equitable and apt eloquence and the congruence and moderation 
of its style. It is quite simply as though it is mustering armies against a single man. It 
threatens him on account of one minor action as though he had committed thousands 
of  crimes.  It  affords  him  a  position  and  complains  about  him  as  though  he  were  an 
aggressive  partner,  despite  his  being  bankrupt  and  having  no  share  of  the  property. 
What is the reason for this and the wisdom in it? 

T h e  A n s w e r : The reason for it is this: because the evil spirits and those 
who follow them take the path of misguidance, they can cause great destruction with a 
small act, and they can violate the rights of many creatures and cause much harm with 
a small deed. 

For example, by some small action or neglecting a small duty, a man on a king’s 
large merchant ship can be the cause of all the efforts of those employed on it and all 
the fruits of their labour being lost and going for nothing. The illustrious owner of the 
ship therefore complains about and threatens the rebellious man in awesome fashion 
on  account  of  all  his  subjects  who  are  connected  with  the  ship.  And  he  inflicts  a 
terrible  punishment  on  him,  taking  into  account  not  his  insignificant  action  but  its 
dreadful results, not in his own name but in that of the rights of his subjects. 

In exactly the same way, through their apparently insignificant mistakes and sins, 
the  people  of  misguidance,  Satan’s  party,  who  are  on  the  ship  of  the  earth  together 
with the people of guidance, transgress  against the rights of  numerous creatures and 
nullify  the  results  of  their  elevated  duties.  The  Monarch  of  Pre-Eternity  and  Post-
Eternity’s  awesome 
therefore,  and  His 
mobilization  of  forces  against  them  are  pure  wisdom  within  perfect  eloquence,  and 
are most apt and appropriate.  

threats  and  complaints  about 

them, 

 

107

It  is  in  conformity  with  the  requirements  of  the  situation,  which  is  the  definition  of 
eloquence  and  its  basis.1  And  it  is  free  of  exaggeration,  which  is  wastefulness  in 
words. 

It is clear that the person will be wretched who does not take refuge in a secure 
stronghold  in  the  face  of  terrible  enemies  who  wreak  much  destruction  with  little 
action. O people of belief! Such a heavenly stronghold of steel is the Qur’an. Enter it 
and be saved! 
 
FOURTH INDICATION 

Investigative  scholars  and  the  people  of  illumination  have  agreed  that  non-
existence  is  pure  evil  and  existence,  pure  good. Yes,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases, 
good, virtues, and perfections are based on existence and are related to it. Even if they 
are  superficially  negative  and  hint  of  non-existence,  their  basis  is  in  existence  and 
pertains  to  it.  While  the  basis  and  leaven  of  all  ugliness,  such  as  misguidance,  evil, 
calamities,  and  sins,  is  non-existence  and  denial.  Their  badness  and  ugliness  arise 
from non-existence. Even if they appear superficially to be positive and pertaining to 
existence, essentially they are non-existence and denial. 

Also,  observedly,  the  existence  of  something  like  a building  is  realized  through 
the  existence  of  all  its  parts.  While  its  destruction,  non-existence,  and  annihilation 
occur through the non-being of one of its main parts. Furthermore, existence requires 
an  existent  cause,  it  is  based  on  a  cause  that  has  an  actual  reality.  Whereas  non-
existence may be based on things which pertain to non-existence. Such things may be 
the cause of something non-existent. 

In  consequence  of  this  rule,  despite  the  awesome  destruction  in  the  universe  of 
devils from among jinn and men, and the varieties of unbelief, misguidance, evil, and 
destruction  they  perpetrate,  they  neither  interfere  one  iota  in  creation,  nor  do  they 
have  any  share  in  divine  sovereignty.  Moreover,  they  do  not  perform  those  acts 
through  any  power  or  ability;  they  perpetrate  many  of  the  things  they  do  through 
neglect  and  abstaining  from  action.  They  commit  evils  by  not  allowing  good  to  be 
done, that is, they become evil. For since bad and evil are a sort of destruction, their 
causes  do  not  have  to  be  an  existent  power  and  active  creativity.  Indeed,  vast 
destruction is wrought due to one non-existent matter or one condition being nullified. 

It was because the Zoroastrians did not develop this mystery that they  

                                                 

1 See, al-Khamawi, Khizana al-Adab, ii, 482; al-Qazwani, al-Idah fi ‘Ulum al-Balagha, i, 15-6. 

 

108

believed there was a creator of good in the universe, called Yazdan, and a creator of 
evil, called Ahriman.2 However, the imaginary  god of evil they  called Ahriman was 
Satan, who causes evil through the power of choice and the power to act, which has 
no ability to create. 

O people of belief! Your most effective weapon and equipment for repairs in the 
face  of  this  awesome  destruction  of  Satan  is  seeking  forgiveness  from  God,  and 
declaring “I seek refuge with God,” to have recourse to Him. And your stronghold is 
the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices. 
 
FIFTH INDICATION 

In the revealed scriptures Almighty God points out to mankind great rewards like 
Paradise  and  terrible  punishments  like  Hell,  and  He  gives  guidance,  many 
admonishments  and  reminders,  and  threats  and  encouragement.  But  despite  there 
being  so  many  means  guiding  the  people  of  belief  to  the  straight  path,  they  are 
defeated in the face of the feeble, unrewarding, repellent stratagems of Satan’s party. 
At one time this caused me much thought. How is it, I wondered, that although they 
believe, they disregard Almighty God’s severe threats? Why isn’t their belief enough? 
They  are  carried  away  by  Satan’s  baseless  wiles  and  rebel  against  God,  although 
according  to  the  verse,  “Feeble  indeed  is  the  cunning  of  Satan.”(4:76)  Some  of  my 
own  friends,  even,  although  they  sincerely  affirmed the  teachings about reality  they 
had heard from me a hundred times and had an excessively good opinion of me and 
relations with me, they were carried away by the trite and hypocritical compliments of 
a corrupt person, and took up a position in favour of him and against me. “Glory be to 
God!,” I exclaimed, “How can a person fall so low? What a deceitful man he was.” I 
slandered him and committed a sin. 

Later,  the  truth  explained  in  the  previous  Indications  became  clear  and 
illuminated  many  obscure  points.  Thanks  be  to  God,  through  its  light  I  understood 
both  that  the  All-Wise  Qur’an’s  powerful  encouragement  and  assurances  are 
completely  in  place,  and  that  the  people  of  belief  being  deceived  by  Satanic 
machinations is not due to a lack of belief or weakness of faith. I understood too that 
someone  who  commits  grievous  sins  is  not  an  unbeliever,  and  that  the  Mu‘tazilites 
and some Kharijite sects are in error by stating: “The person who commits a grievous 
sin  is  either  in  a  state  of  unbelief  or  is  between  belief  and  unbelief,”3  and  that  that 
unfortunate  

                                                 

2 See, al-Shahristani, al-Milal wa’l-Nihal, i, 232-3; al-Iji, Kitab al-Mawaqif, iii, 65; Tahir ibn 

Muhammad, al-Tabsir fi’l-Din, i, 91, 113, 142. 

3 See, al-Iji, Kitab al-Mawaqif, iii, 548; Ibn Abi’l-’Izz, Sharh ‘Aqida al-Tahawiyya, i, 356-62. 

 

109

friend of mine sacrificing a hundred lessons in reality to win the attentions of such a 
scoundrel was  not despicable abasement and degeneration;  I thanked Almighty God 
and  was  saved  from  the  abyss.  For  as  I  said  before,  Satan  pushes  man  into  serious 
peril  because  of  some  insignificant  matter that  in reality  lacks  existence. Moreover, 
man’s soul always listens to Satan; and his powers of anger and animal appetites are 
like both receivers and transmitters of Satan’s whisperings. 

It is in consequence of this that Almighty God’s names of Oft-Forgiving and All-
Compassionate are turned to the people of belief with a maximum manifestation, and 
He points out in the All-Wise Qur’an that the greatest gift He bestows on the prophets 
is forgiveness and He calls on them to seek forgiveness. Repeating the blessed words, 
“In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate” at the start of every Sura and 
commanding  that  it  be  recited  at  the  commencement  of  all  good  works,4  He  shows 
that His all-encompassing mercy embraces the universe and is a stronghold and place 
of  refuge.  And  by  the  command,  “Seek  refuge  with  God,”(7:200,  etc.)  He  makes  a 
shield of the phrase, “I seek refuge with God from Satan the Accursed.” 
 
SIXTH INDICATION 

One of Satan’s most dangerous stratagems is this: he makes certain sensitive and 
ingenuous  people  confuse  imagining  unbelief  with  affirming  it.  He  shows  the 
imagining  of  misguidance  to  be  the  affirmation  of  it.  He  also  conjures  up  in  their 
imaginations ugly thoughts about holy  individuals and sacred things.  He  shows also 
things which are essentially possible together with those that are reasonably possible, 
thus making those things appear to be doubts opposed to the certainty of belief. Then 
the wretched sensitive man supposes that he has fallen into misguidance and unbelief, 
and  that  his  certainty  of  belief  has  been  lost;  he  falls  into  despair  and  becomes  the 
plaything of Satan. Satan works both  his despair, and that weak  vein of  his, and his 
confusion,  so  that  he  either  goes  mad,  or  exclaiming:  “All  is  lost,”  embraces 
misguidance. We have explained in some parts of the Risale-i Nur just how lacking in 
substance are these diabolical stratagems, so here shall discuss them only briefly, as 
follows: 

Just as a snake’s image in a mirror cannot bite, nor the similitude of fire burn, or 
the  reflection  of  filth  soil;  so  the  reflections  of  unbelief  and  association  of  partners 
with God cannot corrupt belief nor the shadows of  

                                                 

4 See, Ibn Maja, Nikah, 19; Musnad, ii, 359; al-Nasa’i, al-Sunan al-Kubra, vi, 127-8; ‘Abd al-

Razzaq, al-Musannaf, vi, 189; Ibn Hibban, al-Sahih, i, 173-4. 

 

110

misguidance,  or  the  imaginings  of  ugly  abuse  and  words  in  the  mirror  of  the 
imagination or of thought change faith, or damage respectful courtesy. For the well-
known rule goes, “To imagine abuse is not abuse, to imagine unbelief is not unbelief, 
and to conceive of misguidance is not misguidance.” 

As for the question of doubts in belief, possibilities that are essentially possible 
do not belie the certainty of belief and do not harm it. One of the established rules of 
the science of the principles of religion is: “An essential impossibiblity cannot negate 
the certainty afforded by knowledge.”5 For example, we are certain that Barla Lake is 
in  its  place  consisting  of  water.  It  is,  however,  essentially  possible  that  this  very 
moment  the  lake  sank  into  the  ground.  It  is  within  the  bounds  of  possibility  that  it 
might  sink.  But  since  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  such  a  possibility,  it  is  not  a 
reasonable possibility and cause doubt. For another established rule of the principles 
of religion is: “A possibility that does not arise from any proof or evidence holds no 
importance.” That is, an essential possibility unsupported by any indication cannot be 
deemed a reasonable possibility and so cause doubts and warrant importance. 

Hence, the unfortunate man exposed to those Satanic whisperings supposes that 
due  to  essential  possibilities  he  has  lost  his  certain  belief  in  the  truths  of  faith.  For 
example,  numerous  essential  possibilites  about  the  human  aspects  of  the  Noble 
Messenger (Upon  whom be blessings  and  peace)  may  occur  to  him  which  cause  no 
harm to his firm belief, but he imagines that they have and so suffers harm. 

Also,  sometimes  Satan  suggests  bad  things  about  Almighty  God  in  the  form of 
whisperings  in the  heart. The man trembles, supposing that  his  heart is corrupted so 
that  it  says  such  things.  But  his  fear  and  trembling  and  lack  of  consent  shows  that 
those words did not come from his heart; they rather came from Satanic whisperings, 
and were imparted and caused to be imagined by Satan. 

Also,  among  man’s  subtle  faculties  are  one  or  two  that  I  have  been  unable  to 
specify;  they  do  not  heed  the  will and  power of  choice  and  probably  should  not  be 
held  responsible.  Sometimes  they  govern,  do  not  listen  to  the  truth,  and  incline 
towards wrong. Then Satan whispers to the man: “You’re not capable of attaining to 
reality and belief, so you involuntarily attempt what is futile and fruitless. That means 
your fate has condemned you to perdition.” The wretched man falls into despair and is 
ruined. 

The believer’s stronghold in the face of the former stratagems of Satan  

                                                 

5 See, al-Ghazzali, al-Manhul, 122; al-Mujaddidi, Qawa’id al-Fiqh, 11, 143. 

 

111

are  the  truths  of belief  and  incontestable  matters  of  the  Qur’an, the  limits  of  which 
have been defined by the principles of the purified exacting scholars. And in the face 
of  the  latter  stratagems,  the  believer’s  stronghold  is  to  seek  refuge  with  God and  to 
attach  no  importance  to  them.  For  the  more  importance  is  given  them,  the  more  it 
attracts  attention  to  them,  and  they  grow  and  swell.  The  believer’s  antidote  and 
remedy for such spiritual wounds is adhering to the practices of the Prophet (UWBP).  
 
SEVENTH INDICATION 

Q u e s t i o n : The Mu‘tazilite authorities considered the creation of evil to be 
evil, and therefore did not attribute the creation of unbelief and misguidance to God, 
as  if  by  so  doing  they  were  exonerating  Him.  They  misguidedly  said:  “Man  creates 
his own actions.”6 They also said: “A believer who commits a grievous sin loses his 
belief,7 for believing in God and affirming Hell is incompatible with such acts. Out of 
fear  at  a  minor  prison  sentence  in  this  world,  a  man  restrains  himself  from  acting 
contrarily to the  law, so if  he commits serious sins, which  infers disregard of divine 
wrath, it certainly points to his lack of belief.” 

T h e  A n s w e r  to the first part of the question: as is elucidated in the treatise 
on divine determining,8 the creation of evil is not evil; it is the inclination to do evil 
that  is  evil.  For  creation  and  bringing  into  being  look  to  all  the  results.  Since  the 
existence  of  one  evil  is  preliminary  to  numerous  good  results,  by  virtue  of  those 
results,  the  creation of  the  evil  becomes  good,  and  is  as  though  good.  For  example, 
fire has a hundred good results, but if because they misuse their wills people make the 
fire evil for themselves, they  cannot say that the  creation of evil is evil. In the same 
way, the creation of devils has numerous wise results such as human progress; so if a 
person is defeated by Satan due to his misuse of his will and misguided inclinations, 
he cannot say that the creation of Satan is evil. For he did evil to himself because he 
was himself disposed to it. 

Yes, since the tendency is a particular relation, it has a particular evil result and 
becomes evil. But since creation looks to all the results, the creation of evil is not evil; 
it  is  good.  The  Mu‘tazilites  did  not  understand  this  mystery,  so  they  said:  “The 
creation of evil is evil, and the creation of bad,  

                                                 

6 See, al-Maturidi, al-Tawhid, i, 92, 169, 314, 315; Ibn Hazm, al-Fasl fi’-Milal, ii, 121; iii, 57, 59. 
7 See, al-Iji, Kitab al-Mawaqif, iii, 548; Ibn Abi’l-’Izz, Sharh ‘Aqida al-Tahawiyya, i, 356-62. 
8 The Twenty-Sixth Word. See, The Words (Istanbul: Sözler Publications, 2008), 477-90. (Tr.) 

 

112

bad.” And to exonerate Almighty God of all fault, they did not ascribe the creation of 
evil  to  Him;  they  fell  into  misguidance,  wrongly  interpreting  the  pillar  of  belief 
“belief in divine determining, both the good of it and the evil of it are from God.”9 

T h e  A n s w e r to the second part of the question “How can someone who 
commits  grievous  sins  remain  a  believer?”:  Firstly,  their  error  may  be  understood 
clearly  from the previous Indications, so there is  no need to repeat it. Secondly, the 
man’s evil-commanding soul prefers an ounce of immediate, present pleasure to a ton 
of postponed, hidden pleasure; similarly, he shrinks at the fear of an  immediate slap 
more than at a  year’s torment in the future. Furthermore, if the emotions dominate a 
person, they do not heed the reason and mind. Desires and delusions govern in him, 
and he prefers the slightest, most trivial present pleasure to huge reward in the future, 
and  he  shrinks  from  some  minor  present  distress  more  than  from  some  terrible 
postponed torment. For desire, illusions, and emotions do not see the future, indeed, 
they deny it. And if the soul assists them, the heart, which is the seat of belief, and the 
mind, fall silent and are defeated. In which case, committing  grievous sins does not 
arise from lack of belief, but from the defeat of the heart and mind by the predominant 
emotions, desires, and illusions. 

Moreover,  as  is  understood  from  the  previous  Indications,  since  the  way  the 
passions  and  evil  work  is  through  destruction,  they are  extremely  easy.  Satans  from 
among  jinn  and  men  quickly  drive  people  down  that  road.  It  is  an  astonishing 
situation,  for  according  to  a  Hadith,  a  light  to  the  extent  of  a  fly’s  wing  from  the 
World of  Eternity10 is comparable  to  the  pleasure and  bounties  a  person  receives  in 
his  entire  life  in  this  world,11  yet  following  Satan,  certain  unfortunates  prefer  the 
pleasures of this fleeting world, which are a mere fly’s wing in comparison with the 
pleasures of that eternal world, which are worth all this world. 

It  is  for  these  reasons  that  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  repeatedly  and  insistently,  and 
with  encouragement  and  threats,  restrains  believers  from  sin  and  urges  them  to  do 
good. 

One time this severe guidance of the All-Wise Qur’an gave me the idea that these 
continual warnings and reminders imply that believers are inconstant and faulty. They 
suggest a situation inconsistent with man’s integrity.  

                                                 

9 Muslim, Iman, 39; Tirmidhi, Iman, 4; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 17; Nasa’i, Iman, 6; Ibn Maja, 

Muqaddima, 63. 

10 Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 13; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 3; Musnad, v, 154, 177. 
11 See, al-Qurtubi, al-Jami‘ al-Ahkam al-Qur’an, xiii, 7. 

 

113

For  although  a  single  order  from  his  superior  is  sufficient  to  exact  an  official’s 
obedience,  if  the  superior  repeats  the  same  order  ten  times,  the  official  will  be 
seriously offended. He will say: “You are insulting me. I am not disloyal.” However, 
the  All-Wise  Qur’an  insistently  repeats  the  same  command  to  the  most  sincere 
believers. 

At  the  time  I  was  puzzling  over  this  idea,  I  had  two  or  three  loyal  friends.  I 
frequently used to warn and remind them lest they be deceived by the machinations of 
satanic  humans.  They  were  not  offended  at  me,  nor  said  I  was  insulting  them. 
However  I  used  to  tell  myself  that  I  was  offending  them  with  these  continual 
admonitions  and  that  I  was  accusing  them  of  disloyalty  and  inconstancy.  Then 
suddenly  the  truth  explained  and  proved  in  the  above  Indications  became  clear.  I 
understood  that  the  All-Wise  Qur’an’s  insistent  repetitions  were  apt  and  exactly  as 
required  by  the  situation,  and  wise  and  not  excessive  or  accusing;  they  were  pure 
wisdom and pure eloquence. I understood too the reason those loyal friends of mine 
were not offended. A summary of the truth is this:  

Since evil spirits provoke people in respect of destruction, they commit much evil 
with  few  actions.  People  who  take  the  path  of  truth  and  guidance,  therefore,  are  in 
need  of  much  caution  and  great  care  and  repeated  warnings  and  various  assistance. 
For  this  reason  Almighty  God  offers  assistance  to  the  people  of  belief  through  His 
thousand and one names by way of those repetitions, and stretches out thousands of 
compassionate  hands to help them. He does not slight their integrity, but upholds it. 
He does not belittle man, but shows Satan’s evil to be great. 

O people of truth and people of guidance! The way to be saved from the above-
mentioned wiles of satanic jinn and men is this: make your headquarters the school of 
the people of the truth, the Sunnis; enter the stronghold of the Qur’an of Miraculous 
Exposition’s incontestable matters; and take the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices as your 
guide; find safety and salvation! 
 
EIGHTH INDICATION 

Q  u  e  s  t  i  o  n  :  You  have  proved  in  the  above  Indications  that  the  way  of 
misguidance is easy, and is destruction and aggression, so that many take it. Whereas 
in other parts of the Risale-i Nur you have proved decisively that the way of unbelief 
and misguidance is so fraught with difficulties and problems that no one should take 
it; that it is not possible to follow it. And you have shown that the path of belief and 
guidance is so easy and clear that everyone should take it. 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  There  are  two  sorts  of  unbelief  and  misguidance.  One 

pertains to actions and secondary matters, and is also denial and  

 

114

rejection  of  the  matters  of  belief.  This  kind  is  misguidance  is  easy.  It  is  a  non-
acceptance of the truth, an abdication, non-existence, and the absence of acceptance. 
In the Risale-i Nur, this sort has been shown to be easy. 

As for the second sort, it pertains  not to actions and secondary matters, but is a 
judgement of the mind and pertains to belief. It does not only deny belief, but opens 
up a way that is the opposite of it. It is the acceptance of what is false and invalid, the 
proof of the reverse of truth. This is not only the denial and refutation of belief, it is 
its opposite. It is not non-acceptance so that it should be easy, but the acceptance of 
non-being,  and  can  only  be  accepted  through  proving  non-existence.  In  accordance 
with the rule “Non-existence cannot be proved,”12 it is certainly not easy to prove it.  

Thus, the unbelief and misguidance shown in other parts of the Risale-i Nur to be 
so difficult and problematic as to be impossible is this sort. Anyone with even a grain 
of intelligence would not take this way. Moreover, as is demonstrated, it imparts such 
grievous pains  and suffocating darkness that anyone reasonable to the tiniest degree 
would not follow it.  

I f  i t  i s  a s k e d : Why do most people take it, seeing that it is so grievous, 

dark, and difficult? 

T h e  A n s w e r : They have fallen into it and cannot extricate themselves. And 
because the animal and vegetable powers in man do not see the consequences and do 
not think of them, and come to dominate man’s subtle faculties,  such people do not 
want  to  extricate  themselves,  so  console  themselves  with  immediate,  temporary 
pleasure.  

Q u e s t i o n : Since misguidance gives rise to such dreadful suffering and fear, 
the  unbeliever  should  not  be  able  to live,  let  alone receiving  pleasure  from  life.  He 
should be crushed by the pain and be absolutely terrified. For although by reason of 
his humanity he desires innumerable things and loves life, because of his unbelief, he 
constantly sees death confronting him as eternal extinction and everlasting separation, 
and the passing of beings and deaths of his friends and those he loves as annihilation 
and eternal parting, so how can such a man  live? How can he receive pleasure from 
life? 

T h e  A n s w e r : He deceives himself through an extraordinary  sophistry of 
Satan, and lives. He supposes he receives a superficial pleasure. We shall allude to the 
true nature of this with a well-known comparison. 

It is related that they said to the ostrich: “You’ve got wings, so fly!” But it folded 
its wings and said: “I’m a camel,” and didn’t fly. So it fell into the hunter’s trap, and 
not wanting the  hunter to see it, stuck its  head in the sand. However, it left its huge 
body exposed, as prey for the hunter. They  

                                                 

12 Ibn Qayyim, al-Sawa’iq al-Mursala, iv, 1310; al-Ruh fi’l-Kalam, i, 198. 

 

115

later  said  to  it:  “You  say  you’re  a  camel, so  you should  carry  loads.”  Whereupon  it 
opened its wings and declared: “I’m a bird,” and so avoided being a beast of burden. 
But then it had neither protector nor food, and was pursued by the hunters. 

In exactly the same way, the unbeliever gave up absolute disbelief in the face of 
the  Qur’an’s  heavenly  proclamations  and  fell  into  scepticism.  If  he  is  asked:  “You 
think  death  is  eternal  extinction.  How  can  a  person  live  when  he  perpetually  sees 
before him the gallows on which he is to be hanged? How can he be happy?” Thanks 
to the portion he has received of the Qur’an’s universal mercy and all-encompassing 
light, the man replies: “Death doesn’t mean going to nothingness; perhaps there is life 
after death.” Or else he plunges his head in the sand of heedlessness like the ostrich so 
that  the  appointed  hour  will  not  spot  him  and  the  grave  will  not  watch  him  and the 
transience of things will not let fly their arrows at him! 

I n  S h o r t : When like the ostrich the unbeliever looks on death and decline as 
extinction,  his  scepticism  makes  him  consider  possible  the  certain  tidings  of  the 
Qur’an  and  revealed  scriptures  concerning  belief  in  the  hereafter  afford  him  a 
possibility. He grasps the possibility and does not suffer that ghastly pain. If he is then 
told: “Since one will go to an everlasting realm, to have a good life there, here one has 
to put up with the difficulties of performing the religious obligations,” his scepticism 
leads  him  to  reply:  “Perhaps  there  is  no  such  world,  so  why  should  I  work  for 
something  that  doesn’t  exist?”  That  is  to  say,  he  is  saved  from  the  pain  of  eternal 
nothingness  by  the  possibility  of  immortality  afforded by  that  decree  of  the  Qur’an, 
and  clinging  onto  the  possibility  of  unbelief,  he  is  saved  from  the  hardship  of  the 
religious  obligations  by  the  possibility  of  non-existence  afforded  by  his  scepticism. 
That  is to say, from this point of  view,  he supposes  he receives more pleasure from 
this life than the believers, for due to the possibility afforded by unbelief he is saved 
from the hardship of the religious obligations, and due to the possibility afforded by 
belief,  he  does  not  expose  himself  to  everlasting  pains.  However,  this  satanic 
sophistry is extremely superficial, temporary, and without benefit. 

Thus,  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  produces  a  sort  of  manifestation  of  mercy  for  the 
unbelievers  too  that  to  an  extent  saves  their  lives  in  this  world  from  being  Hell;  it 
induces doubt in them, so they live through doubt. Otherwise, by recalling the Hell of 
the hereafter they would have suffered the torments of a sort of Hell in this world too, 
and they would have been compelled to commit suicide. 

O people of belief! Fully confident in your belief enter under the protection of the 

Qur’an, which will save you from eternal extinction and the  

 

116

hells of this world and the  hereafter. Submissively  and appreciatively remain within 
the bounds of the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices, and so be saved from both misery in 
this world and torment in the next! 
 
NINTH INDICATION 

Q u e s t i o n : Why is it that the people of guidance, who are God’s party, are so 
often defeated by the people of misguidance, who are Satan’s party, despite the Glory 
of  the  World  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  being  at  their  head  and  their 
receiving so much divine mercy  and assistance and so many  favours? What was the 
reason  for  the  dissemblers  of  Medina  insisting  on  misguidance  and  their  not 
embracing  guidance,  despite  being  close  to  the  brilliant  sun-like  prophethood  and 
messengerhood of  the  Seal  of  the  Prophets  (UWBP)  and  the  Qur’anic  truths,  which 
are more captivating than the universal laws of attraction? 

T h e  A n s w e r : To solve the two parts of this awesome question, a profound 

principle must be explained. It is like this:  

The All-Glorious Creator of the universe has two sort of names, those pertaining 
to  His  glory  and  those  pertaining  to  His  beauty.  Since  the  names  require  to 
demonstrate  their  decrees  through  different  manifestations,  the  Glorious  Creator 
blended together opposites in the universe. Bringing them face to face, he gave them 
aggressive  and  defensive  positions,  in  the  form  of  a  wise  and  beneficial  contest. 
Making  the  opposites  transgress  one  another’s  bounds,  He  brought  conflict  and 
change  into  being,  and  made  the  universe  subject  to  the  law  of  change  and 
transformation  and  the  principles  of  progress  and  advancement.  In  humankind,  the 
comprehensive  fruit  of  the  tree  of  creation,  he  gave  the  law  of  contest  an  even 
stranger  form,  and  opening  the  door  to  striving,  which  would  be  the  means  to  all 
human  progress,  He  gave  Satan’s  party  certain  faculties  with  which  to  challenge 
God’s party. 

It is because of this subtle mystery that the prophets were often defeated by the 
people of misguidance. And the people of misguidance, who are extremely weak and 
impotent, temporarily triumph over the people of truth, who in reality are extremely 
strong, and struggle against them. The wisdom in this strange opposition is as follows: 
Misguidance and unbelief comprise both non-existence and omission, so that they 
are extremely easy and do not require action. They also give rise to destruction, which 
is also easy, and need little action. They are also a source of aggression, which may 
cause  much  harm  to  many  with  little  action, and  by  way  of  intimidating  others  and 
satisfying  the  soul’s  desire  for  power,  may  secure  rank  and  position  for  a  person. 
There is also  

 

117

freedom  in  misguidance  and  unbelief,  which  gratifies  man’s  vegetable  and  animal 
powers,  which  are  blind  to  consequences  and  obsessed  by  present  pleasure,  and 
induces such subtle faculties as the heart and reason to give up their humane and far-
sighted duties. 

However,  the  sacred  way  of  foremost  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace),  the  Beloved  of  the  Sustainer  of  All  the  Worlds,  and  of  the 
people of prophethood and the people of guidance, both pertains to existence, and is 
firmly  established,  and  is  constructive,  and  is  based  on  the  important  principles  of 
action,  moderation,  prudence  and  foresight,  worship,  and  smashing  the  domination 
and  independence  of  the  evil-commanding  soul.13  It  is  because  of  this  that  the 
dissemblers  of  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  time  in  Medina  closed  their  eyes  to  that 
refulgent sun like bats, and surrendering themselves to a satanic force of repulsion in 
the face of that huge attraction, remained in misguidance. 

I f  i t  i s  s a i d : The Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) 
was the Beloved of the Sustainer of All the Worlds;14 and he  held truth in  his  hand 
and  spoke  the  truth  with  his  tongue;15  and  among  the  soldiers  of  his  army  were 
angels;16 and  he watered a whole army with one handful of water;17 and provided a 
feast for a thousand men with four handfuls of wheat and the meat of one kid;18 and 
caused  the  unbelievers’  army  to  flee  by  throwing  a  handful  of  dust  at  them,  which 
entered  all  their  eyes;19  so  how  was  that  dominical  commander  who  performed  a 
thousand miracles similar to these, defeated at the end of Uhud20 and at the beginning 
of Hunayn?21 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and 

peace) was sent to mankind as an exemplary guide and leader so that  

                                                 

13 See, al-Bayhaqi, al-Zuhd, 157; al-Ghazzali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, iii, 4; al-Daylami, al-Musnad, 
iii, 408; Ibn Rajab, Jami‘ al-‘lum wa’l-Hikam, i, 196; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, v, 538; al-‘Ajluni, 
Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 160; ii, 222. 

14 See, Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 1; al-Daylami, Muqadddima, 8. 
15 See, Qur’an, 17:105. 
16 See, Qur’an, 3:123-5. Also, Bukhari, Maghazi, 11. 
17 See, Bukhari, Wudu’, 32; Manaqib, 25; Maghazi, 35; Muslim, ‘Imara, 72, 73; Fada’il, 5-6; 

Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; Nasa’i, Tahara, 61; Musnad, iii, 329. 

18 See, Bukhari, Hiba, 28; At‘ima, 6; Maghazi, 29; Manaqib, 25; Muslim, Ashriba, 141-2, 175; 

Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; Ibn Maja, At‘ima, 47; Muwatta’, Sifat al-Nabi, 19; Musnad, i, 197-8. 

19 See, Muslim, Jihad, 81; Darimi, Siyar, 16; Musnad, i, 103, 368; v, 286, 310. 
20 See, Bukhari, Jihad, 65; Bad’u’l-Khalq, 11; Manaqib al-Ansar, 22; Maghazi, 18; Ayman, 15; 

Diyat, 16; Abu Da’ud, Jihad, 106; Musnad, iv, 293-4. 

21 See, Bukhari, Maghazi, 54; Jihad, 52, 61, 97, 167; Muslim, Jihad, 79; Tirmidhi, Jihad, 15. 

 

118

men might learn from him the rules of social and personal life, become accustomed to 
obeying the  laws of the All-Wise One of Perfection, and act  in conformity  with the 
principles of His wisdom. If the Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) had 
always  relied  on  wonders  and  miracles,  he  could  not  have  been  absolute  guide  and 
leader. 

He  therefore displayed  miracles  from  time  to  time,  in  answer  to  need,  solely  to 
make them affirm his claim to prophethood and to nullify the unbelievers’ denial. At 
other  times  he  obeyed  the  divine  commands  more  than  anyone,  and  more  than 
everyone  acted  in  conformity  with  the  divine  laws  in  creation,  established  through 
dominical  wisdom  and  will,  and  submitted  to  them.  He  used  to  wear  armour  when 
confronting  the  enemy,22  and  would  order  his  troops  to  enter  their  trenches.23  He 
received wounds and suffered hardship.24 In this way he obeyed and observed to the 
letter the laws of divine wisdom and the Greater Shari‘a of Creation. 
 
TENTH INDICATION 

One of the most cunning of Iblis’s wiles is to make those who follow him deny 
himself.  Since  at  this  time  people  whose  minds  have  been  tainted  by  materialist 
philosophy in particular have been hesitant in these self-evident matters, we shall say 
one or two things in the face of this stratagem of Satan. They are as follows: 

There are self-evidently corporeal evil spirits who perform Satan’s functions. It is 
also certain to the same degree that there are evil spirits without bodies from the jinns. 
If they were clothed in physical bodies, they would be the same as those evil human 
beings. Also, if those evil spirits in human form were able to leave aside their bodies, 
they  would be  those  jinn-satans.  Indeed, in  consequence  of  this  terrible  relationship 
one  deviant  school  pronounced:  “After  they  have  died,  excessively  evil  spirits  in 
human form become devils.” 

It  is  well-known  that  when  something  of  high  quality  is  corrupted  it  becomes 
more corrupted than  something of less quality. For example, if  yoghurt and milk  go 
bad  they  may  still  be  eaten,  but  if  oil  goes  bad  it  becomes  inedible,  and  poisonous 
even. Similarly, if the most noble, indeed the highest of creatures, man, is corrupted, 
he becomes more corrupt than a depraved animal. Like vermin who enjoy the stink of 
putrifying matter and  

                                                 

22 See, Abu Da’ud, Jihad, 75; Ibn Maja, Jihad, 18; Musnad, iii, 449. 
23 See, Bukhari, Maghazi, 29; Jihad, 34, 161; Qadar, 16; Tamanni, 7; Muslim, Jihad, 125. 
24 See, Bukhari, Jihad, 80, 85, 163; Wudu’, 72; Maghazi, 24; Nikah, 123; Tibb, 27; Muslim, Jihad, 

101; Tirmidhi, Tibb, 34; Ibn Maja, Tibb, 15. 

 

119

snakes who take pleasure at biting and poisoning, they take pride and pleasure at the 
evils  and  wicked  immorality  of  the  swamp  of  misguidance,  being  gratified  at  the 
harms and crimes of the darkness of evil-doing; quite simply they take on the nature 
of  Satan.  Yes,  a  decisive  indication  of  the  existence  of  devils  from  the  jinn,  is  the 
existence of human satans. 

Secondly: All the hundreds of decisive evidences proving the existence of angels 
and spirit beings in the Twenty-Ninth Word prove also the existence of evils spirits. 
We refer this aspect to that Word. 

Thirdly:  The  existence  of  the  angels,  the  representatives  and  supervisors  of the 
laws  of  the  good  matters  in  the  universe,  is  established  and  agreed  upon  by  all  the 
religions. So too, the existence of evil and satanic spirits, who are the representatives 
and ushers of evil matters and the means of the laws of such matters, is required by 
wisdom and reality, and is certain. Indeed, in evil matters, a conscious screen is more 
necessary.  For  as  is  stated  at  the  beginning  of  the  Twenty-Second  Word,  since 
everyone cannot see the true good of everything,  the All-Glorious Creator has made 
apparent  intermediaries  a  screen  to  apparent  evils  and  defects,  so  that  objections 
should not be levelled at Him, nor His mercy be accused, nor his wisdom criticized or 
unjustly complained about, and so that objections, criticisms, and complaints should 
be directed at the screen, and not turned to the Generous Creator, the Absolutely Wise 
One. Just as He made illness a screen to the appointed hour of death in order to save 
Azra’il  from  the  complaints25  of  His  servants  who  die,  so  too  He  made  Azra’il  a 
screen to the seizing of the spirits of the dying so that the complaints at that situation, 
which  is  fancied  to  be  lacking  in  compassion,  should  not  be  directed  at  Almighty 
God. And even more certainly, dominical wisdom demanded the existence of Satan, 
so  that  objections  and  criticisms  in  the  face  of  evils  and  bad  things  should  not  be 
directed at the All-Glorious Creator. 

Fourthly:  Just  as  man  is  a  small  world,  the  microcosm,  so  is  the  world  a  large 
human  being,  the  macroanthropos.  Small  man  is  an  index  and  summary  of  the 
macroanthropos. The large originals of the samples in man will necessarily be found 
in  the macroanthropos. For  example,  the  existence  of  man’s  faculty  of  memory  is  a 
certain  indication  of  the  existence  of  the  Preserved  Tablet  in  the  world.  So  too 
everyone has experienced in himself the inner faculty situated in a corner of the heart 
which is the means to diabolical suggestions26 and temptations and is a satanic tongue 
that speaks at the  

                                                 

al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur, vi, 543. 

25 See, Abu Nu’aym, Hilya al-Awliya’, v, 51; al-Hakim al-Tirmidhi, Nawadir al-Usul, i, 177-8; 

26 See, Tirmidhi, Tafsir Sura 35:2; al-Nasa’i, al-Sunan al-Kubra, vi, 305; al-Bazzar, al-Musnad, v, 

394; Abu Ya’la, al-Musnad, vii, 278; viii, 417. 

 

120

promptings  of  the  surmising  faculty  and  the  corrupted power of  imagination,  which 
becomes like a  small Satan and acts contrary to  its owner’s will and opposed to his 
desires – these are certain evidences of the existence of great satans in the world. And 
since the inner faculty which is the means of diabolical suggestions and the power of 
imagination  are  an  ear  and  a  tongue,  they  infer  the  existence  of  an  external  evil 
individual who blows on the one and makes the other speak. 
 
ELEVENTH INDICATION 

The All-Wise Qur’an states in miraculous fashion that the universe grows angry 
at the evil of the people of misguidance, and the universal elements becomes wrathful 
and beings, furious. Awesomely, it depicts the storm visited on Noah’s people and the 
assaults of the heavens and earth, the anger of the element air at the denial of the ‘Ad 
and  Thamud  peoples,  and  the  fury  of  the  sea  and  element  water  at  the  people  of 
Pharaoh, and the rage of the element earth at Qarun, and in accordance with the verse, 
“Almost bursting with fury,”(67:8) the vehemence and anger of Hell at the people of 
unbelief  in  the  hereafter,  and  the  rage  of  the  other  beings  at  the  unbelievers  and 
people of  misguidance;  in  miraculous  fashion  it  restrains  the  people  of  misguidance 
and rebellion. 

Q u e s t i o n : Why do the unimportant actions and personal sins of unimportant 

men attract the anger of the universe in this way? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  As  proved  in  other  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  in  the 
previous Indications, unbelief and misguidance are terrible aggression and crimes that 
concern all beings. For one of the most important results of the universe’s creation is 
man’s worship and his responding to divine dominicality with belief and submission. 
However,  due  to  the  denial  which  is  a  part  of  disbelief,  the  people  of  unbelief  and 
misguidance reject that supreme result, which is the ultimate reason for the continued 
existence  of  beings,  and  they therefore perpetrate a  sort of  transgression  against the 
beings’  rights.  Moreover,  since  they  deny  the  manifestations  of  the  divine  names 
which  are  apparent  in  the  mirrors  of  beings  and  exalt  their  value,  they  both  insult 
those sacred names, and by degrading the value of all beings, greatly depreciate them. 
Also,  although  beings  are  dominical  officials  charged  with  elevated  duties,  by  their 
unbelief, the people of misguidance cast them down, and showing them to be lifeless, 
transitory, meaningless creatures, they in a way violate the rights of all of them. 

Thus,  since  the  varieties  of  misguidance  impair  to  a  greater or  lesser  extent the 
dominical  wisdom  in  the  universe’s  creation  and  the divine  purposes  in  the  world’s 
continued existence, the universe becomes angry at the  

 

121

people of rebellion and misguidance, as do all beings and creatures. 

O  wretched  man,  whose  being  is  small  but  guilt  great  and sin  grievous!  If  you 
want  to  be  delivered  from  the  wrath  of  the  universe,  the  rage  of  beings,  and  the 
aversion  of  creatures,  here  is  the  means:  enter  the  sacred  bounds  of  the  All-Wise 
Qur’an and follow the practices of God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings 
and  peace),  who  was  the  herald  of  the  Qur’an.  So  put  yourself  within  its  fold  and 
adhere to the practices! 
 
TWELFTH INDICATION 

This consists of four questions and answers. 
F i r s t  Q u e s t i o n : How can infinite torment in an endless Hell in return for 

limited sins in a limited life be justice? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  It  was  understood  clearly  in  the  above  Indications,  and 
particularly in the Eleventh, that unbelief and misguidance constitute an infinite crime 
and are transgression against innumerable rights. 

S e c o n d  Q u e s t i o n : It is said in the Shari‘a that Hell is punishment for 

actions, but Paradise is a divine favour.27 What is the reason for this? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  It  is  clearly  shown  in  the  above  Indications  that  with  his 
faculty  of  will  and  trifling  wishes,  man  causes  awesome  destruction  and  evils  by 
giving form and reality to something  non-existent or theoretical. Similarly, since his 
soul and appetites always incline towards evil and harm, he is responsible for the evils 
that occur as a result of  his trivial wishes. For his soul wanted them and his desires 
gave  rise  to  them.  And  since  evil  pertains  to  non-existence,  the  servant  is  the  agent 
and  Almighty  God  creates  it.  Being  responsible  for  the  infinite  crime,  he  certainly 
deserves infinite punishment. 

However,  since  good  deeds  and  actions  pertain  to  existence,  man’s  will  and 
wishes cannot be the direct cause of their existence. Man cannot be the true agent in 
such  acts.  Also,  his  evil-commanding  soul  does  not  tend  towards  good  deeds;  it  is 
divine mercy that requires them and dominical power that creates them. Man can only 
lay claim to them through belief, a wish, or an intention. And having claimed them, 
such  good  works  consist  of  thanks  for  the  infinite  divine  bounties  received,  such  as 
the gifts of belief and existence. Such thanks looks to past bounties, while Paradise is 
a favour of the Most Merciful which since it as been promised by Him will be given. 
Apparently it is a reward, but in reality it is a favour. 

                                                 

75-6, 78. 

27 See, Qur’an, 10:58. See also, Bukhari, Riqaq, 18; Marda, 19; Muslim, Sifat al-Munafiqin, 71-3, 

 

122

That is to say, in evils the soul is the cause and deserves the punishment, while in 
good deeds, both the cause and the occasion are from God. Man can only lay claim to 
them through belief. He may not say: “I want the reward,” but he may say: “I hope for 
divine favour.” 

T h i r d  Q u e s t i o n : It is understood from the above explanations that since 
evils  multiply  through  contagion  and  aggression,  a  single  evil  deed  should  be 
recorded  as  a  thousand;  and  since  good  deeds  pertain  to  existence,  they  do  not 
multiply nor do they occur through the servant’s creative act or the desires of his soul; 
they  therefore  should  not  be  recorded  at  all  or  as  only  one.  So  why  are  evil  deeds 
recorded as one and good deeds as ten, and sometimes as thousands?28 

T h e  A n s w e r : In this way Almighty God demonstrates His perfect mercy 

and the beauty of His compassionateness. 

F  o  u  r  t  h    Q  u  e  s  t  i  o  n  :  The  successes  the  people  of  misguidance  have 
achieved and the power they display and their victories over the people of guidance 
show  that  they  rely  on  some  power  and  truth.  This  means  either  that  the  people  of 
guidance possess some weakness, or that the misguided possess some truth? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  God  forbid,  neither  do  they  possess any  truth,  nor do the 
people of truth have any weakness. But regretably  some of the ordinary people who 
are short-sighted and unreasoning become doubtful and hesitant, and harm comes to 
their  belief.  For  they  say:  If  the  people  of  truth  had  possessed  complete  truth  and 
reality,  they  should  not  have  suffered  defeat  and  abasement  to  this  degree.  For  the 
truth is powerful. According to the fundamental principle “Truth is exalted and shall 
not  be  overcome,”29  power  lies  in  truth.  If  the  people  of  misguidance  had  not 
possessed a true power and point of support, they could not have predominated over 
the people of truth and triumphed to this extent. 

T h e  A n s w e r : As is proven in the above Indications, the defeat of the people 
of truth does not arise from lack of power and absence of truth, and as is also proven, 
the  people  of  misguidance’s  victory  does  not  spring  from  their  power  and  capacity 
and their having some source of support. Hence, the answer to this question is all the 
above Indications;  here we  shall only point out a number of the tricks  and weapons 
they employ, as follows:  

I myself  have  frequently observed that mischief-makers, who form ten per cent, 
defeat the righteous, who form ninety per cent.  I  used to be astonished and curious. 
Investigating, I understood certainly that their victory  

                                                 

28 See, Qur’an, 6:160. See also, Bukhari, Iman, 31; Muslim, Iman, 206. 
29 See, Bukhari, Jana’iz, 79: “al-Islam ya’lu wa la yu’la.” 

 

123

results not from power, but from corruption, baseness, destruction, taking advantage 
of differences among the people of truth, sowing conflict among them, from playing 
on their weak traits of character and grafting them with such traits, and exciting the 
emotions of the soul and personal hatred, and through working the evil capacities in 
human nature which are like mines of corruption, and through hypocritically flattering 
the soul’s tyranny in the name of fame and glory, and through everyone fearing their 
unfeeling  destruction.  By  means  of  diabolical  machinations  like  these,  they 
temporarily triumph over the people of truth. But in accordance with the verse,  

And the end is [best] for the righteous,(7:128) 

and  the  rule,  “Truth  is  exalted  and  shall  not  be  overcome,”  in  addition  to  its  not 
yielding  any  significant  benefit  for  them,  their  temporary  triumph  will  lead  to  their 
earning Hell for themselves and Paradise for the people of truth. 

Thus,  because  in  misguidance  those  without  power  appear  powerful  and  the 
insignificant win fame, they take up a position opposed to the people of truth. In this 
way conceited, fame-seeking, hypocritical people demonstrate their power although it 
has little substance and win a position for themselves through intimidating others and 
causing  harm;  they  are  seen  and  attention  is  drawn  to  them,  and  the  destruction  of 
which  they  are  the  cause,  not  through  power  and  ability,  but  through  omission  and 
failure to act, is attributed to them and they become talked about. Just like the person 
obsessed with fame who defiled a place of worship so that everyone would talk about 
him. Even if it meant being execrated, so long as he was talked about, his worship of 
fame made it appear desirable to him. The case became proverbial. 

O  wretched  man  created  for  the  eternal  realm  and  enamoured  of  this  transient 

world! Study closely the meaning of the verse, 

And neither heaven nor earth shed a tear over them,(44:29) 

and  heed  it.  Look,  what  does  it  say?  With  its  explicit  meaning  it  says:  “When  the 
people of misguidance die, the heavens and earth, which are connected with man, do 
not weep over them, that is, they are pleased at their deaths.” While with its implied 
meaning,  it  says:  “The  heavens  and  earth  weep  over  the  bodies  of  the  people  of 
guidance  when  they  die;  they  do  not  want  them  to  depart.”  For  all  the  universe  is 
connected with the people of belief and its beings are happy with them. For by virtue 
of  their  belief  they  know  the  Creator  of  the  Universe,  so  appreciate  the  universe’s 
value, and respect and love it. They do not nurture implicit enmity and contempt for it 
like the people of misguidance. 

 

124

O  man,  think!  You  are  bound  to  die.  If  you  follow  your  soul  and  Satan,  your 
neighbours, and even your relations, will be happy at being delivered from you. But if 
saying, “I seek refuge with God from Satan the Accursed,” you follow the Qur’an and 
the  Merciful  One’s  Beloved  (UWBP),  then  in  accordance  with  your  degree  the 
heavens  and  earth  and  all  beings  will  be  sorry  at  your  parting,  and  in  effect  weep. 
Mourning  in elevated fashion and  giving  you a splendid send-off, they will  indicate 
that you will have a good welcome in the world of eternity according to your degree, 
when you enter it through the door of the grave.30 
 
THIRTEENTH INDICATION 

This consists of three points. 
F i r s t  P o i n t : One of Satan’s most cunning wiles is to deceive people with 
narrow  minds,  short  views,  and  constricted  hearts  concerning  the  immensity  of  the 
truths of belief. He says: “It is said that a single Being directs and administers within 
His  dominicality  all  particles  and  planets  and  stars  and  all  the  other  beings  and  all 
their states. How can a person believe in such an immense and extraordinary matter? 
How  can  it  be  contained  in  the  heart?  How  can  the  mind  accept  it?”  He  awakens  a 
feeling of denial in respect of human impotence. 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  The  way  to  silence  this  wile  of  Satan’s  is  “God  is  Most 
Great!”  And  its  true answer  is  “God  is  Most  Great!”  Yes,  the  reason  “God  is  Most 
Great!”  is the most frequently repeated of all the  marks of Islam  is to eliminate this 
wile.  For  it  is  through  the  light  of  “God  is  Most  Great!”  that  man’s  impotence  and 
lack of power, weakness and lack of strength, and narrow thought see such infinitely 
vast  truths  and  affirm  them.  It  is  through the  strength  of  “God  is  Most  Great!”  that 
man sustains those truths, and situates them within the sphere of “God is Most Great!” 
And he says to his heart which starts to doubt:  

It  is  self-evident  that  the  universe  is  administered  and  directed  in  most  orderly 

fashion. There are two ways in which this may occur: 

The  First  Way:  It  is  possible  that  despite  its  wondrous  immensity,  such  an 
astonishing work comes about through wondrous art in a wondrous way. So this first 
way  is that the universe exists through the dominicality, will, and power of a Single 
and  Eternally  Besought  One,  to  whose  existence  are  witnesses  to  the  number  of 
beings, indeed, of minute particles. 

The Second Way: This is the way of unbelief and associating partners with God, 

which is in no way possible and is so difficult as to be impossible  

                                                 

30 See, Tirmidhi, Qiyama, 26 (2460); Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 31; Musnad, ii, 364; vi, 140. 

 

125

and  is  in  no  respect  reasonable.  For  as  is  proved  decisively  in  many  parts  of  the 
Risale-i  Nur  such  as  the  Twentieth  Letter  and  Twenty-Second  Word,  there  would 
have to be present  in all the beings in the universe and even  in every single particle 
absolute divinity and all-encompassing knowledge and infinite power so that the total 
order  and  regularity,  the  sensitive  balance  and  distinction,  and  the  perfect,  adorned 
embroideries of art to be observed in beings could come into existence. 

In  Short:  If  there  were  no  immense  and  tremendous  dominicality,  which  is 
completely  appropriate  and  fitting,  it  would  necessitate  following  a  way  that  is  in 
every  respect  unreasonable  and  precluded.  Even  Satan  cannot  propose  fleeing  from 
such necessary immensity, and suggest accepting impossibility. 

S  e  c  o  n  d    P  o  i  n  t  :  Another  of  Satan’s  cunning  wiles  is  to  prevent  man 
admitting  his  faults  in  order  to  close  up  the  way  of  seeking  forgiveness  and  taking 
refuge  with  God.  He  also  incites  the  egotism  of  the  human  soul,  so  that  the  soul 
defends itself like a lawyer, quite simply acquitting itself of all fault. 

Yes, a soul that listens to Satan does not want to see its own faults. Even if it does 
see them, it explains them away in a hundred ways. According to the saying: “The eye 
of contentment is blind to faults,”31 when a person looks with pleasure on his soul, he 
does not see its errors. And because he does not see them, he does not admit to them 
or  seek forgiveness, or seek refuge with God from them, so becomes the plaything of 
Satan. How can the soul be relied on when a noble prophet like Joseph (UWP) said:  

“Nor  do  I  absolve  my  own  self  [of  blame];  the  [human]  soul  is  certainly 
prone to evil, unless my Sustainer do bestow His mercy.”?(12:53) 

The person who accuses his soul, sees its faults. And he who admits his faults, seeks 
forgiveness for them. And he who seeks forgiveness, takes refuge with God. And he 
who  takes  refuge  with  God,  is  saved  from  Satan’s  evil.  Not  to see  one’s  faults  is  a 
greater fault than the first fault. And not to admit to one’s faults is a serious defect. If 
one  sees  the  fault,  it  ceases  to  be  a  fault.  If  one  admits  it,  one  becomes  worthy  of 
forgiveness.32 

T h i r d  P o i n t : A satanic wile corrupting the life of society is this: not to see 
all the virtues of a believer on account of a single bad point. Those unjust people who 
heed this wile of Satan are in this way inimical to  

                                                 

31 Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh Dimashq, xxxiii, 219; xxxvi, 319; al-Ghazzali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, iii, 36; 

al-Qalqashandi, Subh al-A’sha’, ix, 196. 

32 See, al-Daylami, al-Musnad, v, 199; al-Quda’i, Musnad al-Shihab, ii, 44. 

 

126

believers. However, when Almighty God weighs up deeds with absolute justice on the 
supreme  scales  at  the  Last  Judgement,  He  will  judge  in  accordance  with  the 
predominance of good deeds over evils and vice versa. Seeing that the causes of evil 
deeds  are  numerous  and  their  existence  is  easy,  sometimes  He  veils  numerous  bad 
deeds with a single good deed. 

That is to say, dealings in this world should be in accordance with divine justice. 
If  a  person’s  good  points  are  greater  in  regard  to  quality  or  quantity  than  his  bad 
points, he is deserving of love and respect. Indeed, one should forgive numerous bad 
points on account of a single laudable virtue. However, due to the vein of tyranny in 
his nature, at the promptings of Satan, the person forgets the hundred virtues of others 
because of a single bad point; he is hostile towards his believing brother, and commits 
sins.  Just  as  a  fly’s  wing  covering  the  eye  conceals  a  mountain,  so  too,  the  veil  of 
hatred  makes  man  conceal  virtues  as  great  as  a  mountain  due  to  a  single  evil 
resembling a fly’s wing; he forgets them, is hostile towards his brother believer, and 
becomes a tool of corruption in the life of society. 

By  means  of  another  wile  resembling  this  one,  Satan  corrupts  the  integrity  of 
peoples’  thoughts.  He  impairs  sound  judgement  concerning  the  truths  of  belief  and 
damages integrity and correctness of thought. It is like this:  

He  desires  to  destroy  hundreds  of  evidences  proving  the  truths  of  belief  with  a 
slight hint refuting them. Whereas it is an established principle that “a single proof is 
superior  to  a  hundred  denials.”  The  statement  of  a  witness  proving  a  claim  is 
preferable  to  a  hundred  people  denying  it.  Consider  this  truth  by  means  of  the 
following comparison:  

There is a palace with a hundred doors all closed. If one of its doors is opened, 
the palace may be entered and all the doors opened. If all the doors are open and one 
or two are closed, it may not be said that the palace cannot not be entered. 

Thus,  the  truths  of  belief  are  the  palace.  Each  evidence  is  a  key;  it  proves  the 
truths and opens a door. If one of the doors remains closed, the truths of belief cannot 
be  abandoned  and  denied.  Satan  however,  in  consequence  of  certain  things  or  by 
means of heedlessness or ignorance, points out a door that has remained closed, thus 
causing  a  person  to  disregard  all  the  positive  evidences.  He  deceives  the  person, 
saying:  “See,  this  palace  cannot  be  entered.  Perhaps  it  isn’t  a  palace  and  perhaps 
there’s nothing inside it.” 

O wretched man afflicted by Satan and his wiles! If you want the life of religion 
and of society and personal life all to be healthy, and if you want integrity of thought, 
a sound view, and a sincere heart, weigh up your  

 

127

actions and thoughts on the scales of the incontestable matters of the Qur’an and the 
balance of the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices. Always take the Qur’an and the practices 
as  your  guide.  Say:  “I  take  refuge  with  God  from  Satan  the  Accursed,”  and  seek 
refuge with God Almighty! 

The above thirteen Indications are thirteen keys. Use them to open the door of the 

fortified stronghold of the Sura, 

Say: I  seek  refuge  with  the  Lord and  Cherisher  of  mankind *  The  Ruler  of 
mankind  *  The  God  of  mankind  *  From  the  mischief  of  the  Whisperer  [of 
evil], who withdraws [after his whisper]–  * [The same] who whispers into 
the hearts of mankind–  * Among jinns and among men;(114:1-6) 

enter this secure citadel and find safety! 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

And say: O My Sustainer, I seek refuge with You from the whisperings of the 
Evil Ones, * and I seek refuge with you, my Sustainer lest they should come 
near me.(23:97-8) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

128

The Fourteenth Flash 

[This consists of two stations. The first consists of the answer to two 
questions.] 

 

 

In His Name be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

 
Peace be upon you, and God’s mercy and blessings! 
My Dear and Loyal Brother, Re’fet Bey! 
The answer to the question you ask about the Bull and the Fish is to be found in 
several  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur.  The  Third  Branch  of  the  Twenty-Fourth  Word 
contains an explanation of that sort of question, in the light of twelve important rules 
called  twelve  principles.  Those  rules  all  offer  criteria  for  understanding  the  various 
interpretations of the Prophet’s (UWBP)  Hadiths, and comprise important principles 
for  dispelling  doubts  that  may  arise  about  them.  Unfortunately  at  the  moment  a 
number of circumstances prevent my becoming occupied with scholarly matters that 
are not inspiration. I therefore cannot reply to your question as you asked it. I have to 
be busy with the  inspiration when it comes to my  heart, I am compelled to be busy 
with it. I answer some questions because they coincide with the inspirations, so don’t 
be offended. I cannot answer all questions as they deserve. But this time let me reply 
briefly to your question. 

This time you ask in your question: “The hojas say that the earth rests on a bull 
and a fish, but geography sees it hanging in space and travelling like a star. There is 
neither bull nor fish?” 

T h e  A n s w e r : There is a sound narration attributed to people like Ibn ‘Abbas 
(May God be pleased with him) which says that the Noble Messenger (Upon whom 
be blessings and peace) was asked: “What does the world rest on?” He replied: “On 
the Bull and the Fish.”1 In one narration,  

                                                 

1 See, Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 636; al-Mundhiri, al-Targhib wa’l-Tarhib, iv, 257; al-Haythami, 

Majmu‘ al-Zawa’id, viii, 131; Ibn al-Jawzi, al-Muntazam, i, 172. 

 

129

he said, “On the Bull,” and on another occasion he said, “On the Fish.” Some Hadith 
scholars applied this Hadith to superstitions and stories taken from isra’iliyat, related 
since early times. Scholars of the Children of Israel who became Muslims especially 
applied it to stories about the Bull and the Fish they had seen in the former scriptures, 
altering it to mean  something strange. For now I shall  explain three ‘principles’ and 
three ‘aspects’ in connection with your question. 
 
FIRST PRINCIPLE 

When  some  of  the  Israelite  scholars  became  Muslims,  their  former  knowledge 
became  Muslim  along  with  them  and  was  ascribed  to  Islam.  However,  what  they 
knew contained errors which were certainly their errors and not Islam’s. 
 
SECOND PRINCIPLE 

On comparisons and metaphors passing from the elite to the common people, that 
is, on their falling from the hands of learning to those of ignorance, with the passage 
of  time  they  are  imagined  to  be  literally  true.  For  example,  when  I  was  a  child  an 
eclipse  of  the  moon  occurred.  I  asked  my  mother:  “Why  has  the  moon  gone  like 
that?”  She  replied:  “A  snake  has  swallowed  it.”  “It  can  still  be  seen,”  I  said.  She 
replied: “The snakes up there are like glass; they show the things inside them!” 

For a long time I recalled this childhood memory. Pondering over it, I would say: 
“How could such a false superstition come to be repeated by serious people like my 
mother?” Then when I studied astronomy I realized that people like her who repeated 
it supposed a metaphor to be reality. For when the vast circle called the zodiac, which 
is the circle denoting the degrees of the sun,  and the circle of the declination of the 
moon, which is the circle depicting its mansions, pass over one another, it gives each 
of the two circles the form of an arc. Using a subtle metaphor the astronomers called 
the two arcs “the two great serpents.” They called the points of intersection of the two 
circles “the head” and “the tail.” When the moon comes to the head and the sun to the 
tail, in the terminology of astronomy, an interposition of the earth occurs. That is, the 
globe  of  the  earth  passes  right  between  the  two  of  them  and  the  moon  is  eclipsed. 
According to the above metaphor, “the moon has entered the serpent’s mouth.” Thus, 
when  this  elevated  and  scholarly  metaphor  entered  the  language  of  the  common 
people,  in  the  course  of  time  it  took  on  the  shape  of  a  huge  snake  swallowing  the 
moon. 

Thus,  with  a  sacred  and  subtle  metaphor  and  meaningful  allusion,  two  great 
angels were called the Bull (T. Sevr; Ar. Thawr) and the Fish (T. Hût; A. Hut), but on 
entering  

 

130

the common language from the elevated tongue of the prophethood, the metaphor was 
transformed  and  given  a  literal  meaning,  and  they  took  on  the  form  of  a  truly 
enormous bull and awesome fish. 
 
THIRD PRINCIPLE 

Just  as  the  Qur’an  contains  allegories  and  comparisons,  and  with  them  teaches 
profound  matters  to  the  ordinary  people;  so  do  Hadiths  contain  comparisons  and 
allegories;  they  express  profound  truths  by  means  of  familiar  comparisons.  For 
example,  as  we have  described  in  two  other  places,  one  time  in  the  presence  of the 
Prophet (UWBP) a deep rumbling was heard. He said: “It is the sound of a rock which 
has been rolling downhill for seventy  years and has now hit the bottom of Hell.”2 A 
few  minutes  later  someone  arrived  and  reported  that  a  famous  seventy-year-old 
dissembler  had  died,  thus  proclaiming  the  true  meaning  of  the  Noble  Messenger’s 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) highly eloquent comparison.  

For now, three ‘aspects’ will be explained in reply to your question: 
T h e  F i r s t : Almighty God appointed four angels – called the Eagle (Nasr – 
Aquila)  and  the  Bull  (Thawr  –  Taurus)3  –  as  bearers  of  the  divine  throne  and  the 
heavens,  to  supervise  His  dominical  sovereignty.  He  also  appointed  two  angels  as 
supervisors  and  bearers of  the  earth,  which  is  the  small  brother  of  the  heavens  and 
companion  of  the  planets. One  of  them  was  called  the  Bull  and  the  other,  the  Fish. 
The reason for His giving these names is this: 

There are two parts to the earth, one  is water and the other is land. Fish inhabit 
the  part  that  is  water,  while  agriculture, the  support of  human  life,  is  practised  with 
bulls and oxen, which inhabit the part of the earth that is land; agriculture rests on the 
shoulders of oxen. Since the two angels appointed to the earth are both commanders 
and  supervisors,  they  surely  have  some  sort  of  relationship  with  the  bovine  and 
piscine species. Indeed, “And the knowledge is with God,” the angels are represented 
in the Worlds of the Inner Dimensions of Things and of Similitudes in the forms of a 
bull and a fish.4 Thus, alluding to their relationship and supervision and those  

                                                 

2 See, Muslim, Janna, 12; Musnad, iii, 315, 341, 346. 
3 Bayhaqi, Shu‘ab al-Iman, 433; Dhahabi, Mizan al-I‘tidal, iv, 352; al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-

Manthur, i, 329. 

4 The globe of the earth is a dominical ship ploughing through the oceans of space, and according 
to a Hadith, is the tillage of the hereafter, that is, an arable field and nursery. How fitting, then, are the 
name of Fish for the angel who commands that huge lifeless and unconscious ship and makes it swim 
through those seas at the divine command in regular, purposeful fashion, and the name of Bull for the 
angel who with divine permission supervises that arable field. 

 

131

two  important  species  of  the  earth,  with  his  miraculous  manner  of  expression  the 
Prophet  (UWBP)  said:  “The  earth  is  on  the  Bull  and  the  Fish,”  thus  stating  in  one 
fine, concise sentence a page of profound truths. 

S e c o n d  A s p e c t : If it is said: “What does the government and its rule rest 
on?,”  it  will  be  said  in  reply:  “On  the  sword  and  the  pen.”  That  is,  it  rests  on  the 
valour of the soldier’s sword and the perspicacity and justice of the official’s pen. In 
the  same  way,  since  the  earth  is  the  dwelling-place  of  animate  beings  and  the 
commander  of  animate  beings  is  man,  and  fish  are  the  means  of  livelihood  of  the 
majority of men who live by the sea, and the majority of those who do not live by the 
sea live by means of agriculture, which rests on the shoulders of bulls and oxen, and 
fish are also an important means of trade, just as the state rests on the sword and the 
pen, so it may also be said that the earth rests on the ox and the fish. For man cannot 
survive  if  the  ox  does  not  work  or fish  do  not produce  millions of  eggs;  life  would 
cease and the All-Wise Creator would destroy the earth. 

Thus,  replying  in  a  most  miraculous,  elevated,  and  wise  way,  God’s  Noble 
Messenger  (UWBP)  said:  “The  earth  rests  on  the  bull  and  the  fish.”  He  taught  an 
extensive truth with two words and showed how closely linked man’s life is to the life 
of the animal species. 

T h i r d  A s p e c t : In the view of ancient cosmology the sun travelled and a 
constellation  was  defined  every  thirty  degrees  of  its  journey.  If  hypothetical  lines 
were drawn connecting the stars in the constellations with one another, some take on 
the  shape  of  a  lion,  others  the  shape  of  scales,  others  the  shape  of  a  bull,  and  yet 
others the shape of a fish. Names were given to the constellations in consequence of 
those relationships. But in the view of astronomy this age, the sun does not travel. The 
constellations remain  idle and without work, for the earth travels instead of the sun. 
They  assume  shapes  on  a  small  scale  within  the  annual  orbit  of  the  earth  on  the 
ground,  instead  of  those  lofty  idle  constellations  above.  Thus,  the  heavenly 
constellations are represented out of earth’s annual orbit, and each month the earth is 
in the shadow and likeness of one of the constellations. It is as if they are represented 
in the mirror-like annual orbit of the earth. 

For  this  reason,  as  we  mentioned  above, on  one  occasion  the  Noble  Messenger 
(Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  said:  “On  the  Bull,”  and  on  another  he  said: 
“On the Fish.” Yes, he indicated a truly profound truth that would be understood only 
many  centuries  later,  and  said  in  the  miraculous  prophetic  tongue:  “On  the  Bull,” 
because at that time the earth was in the likeness of the constellation Taurus. And on 
being  asked  a  month  later,  he  replied:  “On  the  Fish,”  for  then  the  earth  was  in  the 
shadow of the constellation of Pisces.  

 

132

Yes,  he  said:  “On  the  Bull  and  the  Fish”  and  alluded  to  an  elevated  truth  that 
would  be  understood  in  the  future,  and  hinted  at  the  earth’s  duty  of  motion  and 
journeying, and the heavenly constellations being idle and without guests in regard to 
the  sun,  and  that  the  constellations  which  truly  work  are  in  the  earth’s  annual orbit 
and that it is the earth which journeys and performs duties in the constellations. 

And God knows best what is right. 
The  extraordinary  and  unreasonable  stories  in  some  Islamic  books  are  either 
isra’iliyat, or they are allegories, or they are the interpretations of the Hadith scholars, 
which careless people have supposed to be Hadiths and have attributed them to God’s 
Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace). 

O our Sustainer! Do not take us to task if we forget or do wrong.(2:282) 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 

us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

 
THE SECOND QUESTION is about the People of the Cloak. 

My brother! Regarding your question about the People of the Cloak, only one of 

the many instances of wisdom concerning it will be explained, as follows: 

Many  mysteries  and  instances  of  wisdom  are  found  in  God’s  Noble  Messenger 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) covering ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) 
and  Fatima  (May  God  be  pleased  with  her)  and  Hasan  and  Husayn  (May  God  be 
pleased with them) with the blessed cloak he wore, and his praying for them with the 
verse, 

[And God only wishes] to remove all abomination from you, members of the 
Family, and to make you pure and spotless.(33:33)5 

I shall not discuss the mysteries, but one instance of wisdom connected with the 

function of messengership is this: 

God’s  Noble  Messenger  (UWBP)  saw  with  the  eye  of  prophethood,  which 
penetrated  the  Unseen  and  beheld  the  future,  that  thirty  or  forty  years  later  serious 
strife  would  erupt  among  the  Companions  and  the  generation  that  succeeded  them, 
and that blood would be spilt. He witnessed that three of the people under his cloak 
would be the most distinguished of  

                                                 

5 This narration has various lines of transmission, see, Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 61; Tirmidhi, 

Manaqib, 60; Musnad, i, 330; iv, 107; vi, 292, 296, 298, 304; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 416; iii, 147; 
al-Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, ix, 166, 169; al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur, v, 197; Kandahlawi, 
Hayat al-Sahaba, iv, 105. 

 

133

them. So he enfolded them in his cloak, giving the four, plus himself, the title of the 
Five People of the Cloak.6 In this way  he wanted to acquit and exonerate ‘Ali (May 
God be pleased with him) in the view of the Islamic community; to console and offer 
condolences  to  Husayn  (May  God be  pleased  with  him);  to  congratulate  Hasan  and 
proclaim  the  honour  he  would  acquire  by  removing  through  reconciliation  serious 
discord, and his supreme value for the Islamic community; and to show that Fatima’s 
descendants would be pure and honoured.  

For sure ‘Ali was the rightful Caliph, but since the blood that would be spilt held 
great importance and since in the view of the community his acquittal and exoneration 
were  important  on  account  of  the  function  of  messengership,  the  Noble  Messenger 
(UWBP)  in  this  way  absolved  him.  He  invited  the  Kharijites  and  the  aggressive 
supporters of the  Umayyads to be silent, for they criticized him and accused him of 
error  and  misguidance.  Yes,  the  excesses  perpetrated  against  ‘Ali  (May  God  be 
pleased with him) by the extreme supporters of the Kharijites and Umayyads and their 
accusations of misguidance, and the truly tragic, distressing events in Husayn’s (May 
God  be  pleased  with  him)  time  together  with  the  excesses  and  innovations  of  the 
Shi‘a  and  the  absolving  of  the  two  Shaykhs,  have  all  been  most  damaging  for  the 
people of Islam. 

Thus, with his cloak and prayer, the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings 
and peace) absolved Husayn of responsibility, and cleared him of the accusations and 
bad opinion of the Islamic community. So too he congratulated Hasan for the good he 
was to do for the community by bringing about the reconciliation. And he announced 
that  being  known  as the  Prophet’s  Family,  the  blessed  progeny  of  Fatima  would be 
highly honoured, like those of Mary’s mother,7 who said: 

I commend her and her offspring to your protection from the Evil One, the 
Rejected.(3:36) 
O  God!  Grant  blessings  to  our  master  Muhammad,  and  to  his  righteous, 
pure, and pious Family, and to his Companions, noble and select strivers in 
God’s way. Amen. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

6 See, Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 61; Ibn Abi Shayba, al-Musannaf, vi, 370. 
7 She was called Hanna bint Fakuz; see, al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 648, 651; al-Tabari, Jami‘ al-

Bayan, iii, 235, 237, 241, 244, 294. 

 

134

Second Station 
 
This consists of six of the thousands of mysteries contained in 
“In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate” 

 

 

NOTE:  A bright  light from “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the 
Compassionate”  concerning  divine  mercy  appeared  to  my  dull  mind 
from  afar.  I  wanted  to  record  it  for  myself  in  the  form  of  notes,  to 
hunt it down and capture it, and circumscribe the light with twenty to 
thirty  mysteries.  But  unfortunately  I  was  not  able  to  do  this  at  the 
present time  and the twenty or thirty mysteries were reduced to five 
or  six.  When  I  say:  “O  man!”,  I  mean  myself.  Although  this  lesson 
addresses my own soul in particular, I refer it as the Second Station of 
the  Fourteenth  Flash  for  the  approval  of  my  meticulous  brothers  in 
the  hope  that  it  may  benefit  those  with  whom  I  am  connected 
spiritually  and  whose  souls  are  more  discerning  than  mine.  This 
lesson  looks  to  the  heart  more  than  the  reason,  and  to  spiritual 
pleasure and perception rather than rational proofs. 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
[The Queen] said: “Ye chiefs! Here is – delivered to me – a letter worthy of 
respect.  It  is  from  Solomon,  and  is  [as  follows]:  In  the  Name  of  God,  the 
Merciful, the Compassionate.”(27:29-30) 

A number of mysteries will be mentioned in this station. 

 
FIRST MYSTERY 

Compassionate” as follows: 

I  saw  one  manifestation  of  “In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Merciful,  the 

On the face of the universe, the face of the earth, and the face of man are three 

stamps of dominicality one within the other and each showing samples of the others. 

The First is the great stamp of Godhead, which is manifested through the mutual 
assistance, co-operation, and embracing and corresponding to one another of beings in 
the totality of the universe. This looks to “In the Name of God.” 

The  Second  is  the  great  stamp  of  divine  mercifulness,  which  is  manifested 
through  the  mutual  resemblance  and  proportion,  order,  harmony,  favour  and 
compassion in the disposal, raising, and administration of plants  

 

135

and  animals  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  This  looks  to  “In  the  Name  of  God,  the 
Merciful.” 

Then  is  the  exalted  stamp  of  divine  compassionateness,  which  is  manifested 
through the subtleties of divine beneficence, fine points of divine clemency, and rays 
of divine compassion on the face of man’s comprehensive nature. This looks to “the 
Compassionate” in “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.” 

That  is  to  say,  “In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Merciful,  the  Compassionate”  is  the 
sacred title of three stamps of divine oneness, which form a luminous line on the page 
of the world, and a strong cord, and shining filament. That is, by being revealed from 
above,  the  tip  of  “In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Merciful,  the  Compassionate”  rests  on 
man,  the  fruit  of  the  universe  and  miniature  copy  of  the  world;  it  binds  the  lower 
world to the divine throne; it is a way for man to ascend to the human throne. 
 
SECOND MYSTERY 

In  order  not  to  overwhelm  minds  by  divine  unity,  which  is  apparent  in  the 
boundless  multiplicity  of  creatures,  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  constantly 
points out the manifestation of divine oneness within divine unity. For example, the 
sun encompasses numberless things with its light. A truly extensive conceptual ability 
and comprehensive view is necessary to behold the sun itself in the totality of its light. 
So, lest  the  sun be forgotten,  it  is  displayed  in  every  shining  object  by  means  of  its 
reflection.  And  in  accordance  with  their  capacities,  all  lustrous  objects  reflect  the 
sun’s attributes, such as its light and heat and the seven colours in its  light, together 
with  the  manifestation  of  its  essence.  So  too,  the  sun’s  attributes  encompass  all  the 
things facing it.  

In exactly the  same way, “And God’s is the  highest similitude”(16:60) – but let 
there  be  no  mistake  in  the  comparison  –  just  as  divine  oneness  and  eternal 
besoughtedness have a manifestation together with all the divine names in everything, 
in animate creatures in particular, and especially in man’s mirror-like essence; so too 
through  divine  unity  each  of  the divine  names  connected  to beings  encompasses  all 
things. Thus,  lest  minds  become overwhelmed  by  divine  unity  and  hearts  forget the 
Most Pure and Holy Essence, the Qur’an constantly draws attention to the stamp of 
divine oneness within divine unity. And that stamp, with its three salient points, is “In 
the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.” 
 
THIRD MYSTERY 

What makes this boundless universe rejoice is clearly divine mercy.  

 

136

What  illuminates these dark beings  is self-evidently divine mercy. What  fosters and 
raises  creatures  struggling  with  their  endless  needs  is  self-evidently  again  divine 
mercy. What causes the whole universe to be turned towards man, like a tree together 
with all its parts is turned towards its fruit, and causes it to look to him and run to his 
assistance is clearly divine mercy. What fills and illuminates boundless space and the 
empty,  vacant  world  and  makes  it  rejoice  is  self-evidently  divine  mercy.  And  what 
designates  ephemeral man  for  eternity  and  makes  him  the  addressee  and  beloved of 
the Pre-Eternal and Post-Eternal One is self-evidently divine mercy. 

O man! Since divine mercy is such a powerful, inviting, sweet, assisting lovable 
truth,  say:  “In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Merciful,  the  Compassionate,”  adhere  to  this 
truth and be saved from absolute desolation and the pains of unending  needs! Draw 
close to the throne of the Pre-Eternal and Post-Eternal Monarch, and availing yourself 
of  the  compassionate  and  rays  of  divine  mercy,  become  His  addressee,  friend,  and 
beloved. 

All the realms of beings in the universe are purposively gathered around man and 
are  made  to  hasten  to  meet  all  his  needs  with  the  utmost  order  and  wisdom,  which 
clearly  arises  from  one  of  two  situations.  Either  each  realm  of  beings  knows  man, 
obeys  him,  and  runs  to  help  him,  which  just  as  it  is  completely  irrational  is  also 
impossible in many respects; or an absolutely impotent being like man has to possess 
the  power of  the  mightiest  absolute sovereign;  or  this  assistance  occurs  through  the 
knowledge of an Absolutely Powerful One behind the veil of the universe. That is to 
say, it is not that the different beings in the universe know man, but that they are the 
evidences of a Knowing, Compassionate One who is acquainted with him and knows 
him. 

O man! Come to your senses! Is it at all possible that the All-Glorious One, who 
causes all the varieties of creatures to turn towards you and stretch out their hands to 
assist you, and to say: “Here we are!” in the face of your needs – is it possible that He 
does  not  know  you,  is  not  acquainted  with  you,  does  not  see  you?  Since  He  does 
know  you,  He  informs  you  that  He  knows  you  through  His  mercy.  So  you  should 
know  Him too,  and  with  respect let  Him  know  that  you  know Him,  and  understand 
with certainty that what subjugates the vast universe to an absolutely weak, absolutely 
impotent, absolutely needy, ephemeral, insignificant creature like you, and despatches 
it  to  assist  you,  is  the  truth  of  divine  mercy,  which  comprises  wisdom,  favour, 
knowledge, and power. 

Most  certainly,  a  mercy  such  as  this  requires  universal  and  sincere  thanks,  and 
earnest and genuine respect. Therefore, say: “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the 
Compassionate,” which is the interpreter and expression  

 

137

of  such  sincere  thanks  and  genuine  respect.  Make  it  the  means  of  attaining  to  the 
mercy, and an intercessor at the court of the All-Merciful One. 

The  existence  and  reality  of divine  mercy  are as  clear  as  the  sun.  For  just  as  a 
woven  tapestry  centred  on  one  point  is  formed  by  the  order  and  situation  of  the 
threads of its warp and weft coming from all directions, so too the luminous threads 
extending  from  the  manifestation  of  a  thousand  and  one  divine  names  in  the  vast 
sphere of the universe weave such a seal of compassionateness, tapestry of clemency, 
and seal of benevolence within a stamp of mercy that it demonstrates itself to minds 
more brilliantly than the sun.  

The Beauteous All-Merciful One, who orders the sun and moon, the elements and 
minerals,  and  plants  and  animals  like  the  warp  and  weft  of  a  vast  woven  tapestry 
through the rays of His thousand and one names, and causes them to serve  life; and 
demonstrates  His  compassion  through  the  exceedingly  sweet  and  self-sacrificing 
compassion of mothers, plant and animal; and subjugates animate creatures to human 
life, and from this demonstrates man’s importance and a most lovely large tapestry of 
divine dominicality, and manifests His brilliant mercy; – that Most Merciful One has, 
in  the  face  of  His  own  absolute  lack  of  need,  made  His  mercy  an  acceptable 
intercessor for animate creatures and man. 

O man! If you are truly a human being, say: “In the Name of God, the Merciful, 
the Compassionate.” Find that intercessor! For sure, it is clearly, self-evidently, divine 
mercy  which,  without  forgetting  or  confusing  any  of  them,  raises,  nurtures,  and 
administers  the  innumerable  plant  and  animal  species  on  the  earth  at  precisely  the 
right  time  and  with  perfect  order,  wisdom,  and  beneficence,  and  stamps  the  seal  of 
divine oneness on the face of the globe of the earth. The existence of divine mercy is 
as certain as the existence of the beings on the face of the earth, so do the beings offer 
evidences of its reality to their own number. 

Just as there is this seal of mercy and stamp of divine oneness on the face of the 
earth, so on the face of man’s nature is a stamp of divine mercy that is not inferior to 
the stamp of compassion and vast stamp of mercy on the face of the universe. Simply, 
man has so comprehensive a nature he is as though the point of focus of a thousand 
and one divine names. 

O man! Is it at all possible that the One who gives you this face, and places such 
a  stamp  of  mercy  and  seal  of  oneness  on  it  would  leave  you  to  your  own  devices, 
attach  no  importance  to  you,  pay  no  attention  to  your  actions,  make  the  whole 
universe,  which  is  turned  towards  you,  futile  and  pointless,  and  make  the  tree  of 
creation rotten and insignificant with decayed fruit? Would He cause His mercy to be 
denied, although it is as  

 

138

obvious as the sun, as well as His wisdom, which is as clear as daylight, and neither 
of which can in any way be doubted, nor are in any way deficient? God forbid! 

O man!  Understand that there  is a way to ascend to the throne of divine mercy, 
and that  is, “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the  Compassionate.” If  you want to 
understand the importance of this ascent, look at the beginning of the one hundred and 
fourteen Suras of  the Qur’an  of Miraculous  Exposition,  and at  the  beginnings  of  all 
estimable  books,  and  at  the  start  of  all  good  works.  A  clear  proof  of  the  God-
determined  grandeur  of  “In  the  Name  of  God”  is  that  Imam  Shafi‘i  (May  God  be 
pleased with  him), one of the  very  foremost Islamic scholars, said: “In the Name of 
God,  the  Merciful,  the  Compassionate  is  only  one  verse,  yet  it  was  revealed  one 
hundred  and fourteen times in the Qur’an.”1 
 
FOURTH MYSTERY 

In  the  face  of  the  manifestation  of  divine  unity  within  boundless  multiplicity, 
declaring:  “You  alone  do  we  worship”(1:5)  is  not  sufficient  for  everyone;  the  mind 
wanders.  One’s  heart  would  have  to  be  as  broad as  the  globe  to observe  the  Single 
One behind the unity in the totality of beings, and to say: “You alone do we worship, 
and from You alone do we seek help!”(1:5) In consequence, so that the seal of divine 
oneness  should  be  apparent  on  all  species  and  realms  of  beings  just  as  it  is  shown 
clearly on  individual objects, and that they  should call to mind the Single One, it  is 
shown within the stamp of divine mercy. Thus everyone at every level may turn to the 
Most Pure and Holy One, and saying: “You alone do we worship, and from You alone 
do we seek help,” address Him directly. 

It  is  in  order  to  express  this  mighty  mystery  and  clearly  point  out  the  seal  of 
divine  oneness that  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  suddenly  mentions  the  smallest  sphere  and 
most  particular  matter  when  describing  the  vastest  sphere  of  the  universe,  for 
example, the creation of the heavens and the earth. That is, so that the mind does not 
wander,  nor  the  heart  drown,  and  the  spirit  may  find  its  True  Object  of  Worship 
directly, while mentioning the creation of the heavens and earth it opens a discussion 
of man’s creation and voice, and the subtle details of the bounties and wisdom in his 
features, for example. This truth is demonstrated in miraculous fashion by the verse,  

                                                 

1 See, al-Shafi’i, al-Umm, i, 208; al-Jassas, Ahkam al-Qur’an, i, 8; al-Ghazzali, al-Mustafa, i, 82; 

Ibn al-Jawzi, al-Tahqiq fi Ahadith al-Khilaf, i, 345-7; al-Zayla’i, Nasb al-Raya, i, 327. 

 

139

And among  His  signs  is  the  creation of  the heavens  and  the  earth, and the 
variations in your languages and in your colours.”(30:22) 

Within innumerable creatures and infinite multiplicity, there are stamps of unity 
like  concentric  circles  of  many  sorts  and  degrees  from  the  greatest  stamp  to  the 
smallest. But however clear the unity is, it is still unity within multiplicity; it does not 
truly  address  observers.  Hence,  there  has  to  be  the  stamp  of  divine  oneness  behind 
unity  so  that  unity  does  not  call  to  mind  multiplicity  and  before  the  Most  Pure  and 
Holy One a way may be opened up to the heart directly. 

Furthermore,  a  truly  captivating  design,  shining  light,  agreeable  sweetness, 
pleasing beauty, and powerful truth – which is the stamp of divine mercy and seal of 
divine compassion – has been placed on the stamp of divine oneness in order to direct 
gazes towards it and attract hearts. Yes, it is the strength of that mercy that attracts the 
gazes  of  conscious  beings,  draws  them  to  it,  and  causes  them  to  reach  the  seal  of 
oneness and to observe the Single One, and from that to truly manifest the address of 
“You alone do we worship, and from You alone do we seek help.” 

It is because “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate” is the index 
of  Sura  al-Fatiha  and  a  concise  summary  of  the  Qur’an  that  it  is  the  sign  and 
interpreter of  this  mighty  mystery.  The  person  who  clasps  it  may  travel  through  the 
levels of divine mercy. And the person who causes this interpreter to speak may learn 
about the mysteries of divine mercy and behold the  lights of divine compassion and 
pity. 
 
FIFTH MYSTERY 

There is a Hadith which goes something like this: “God created man in the form 
of the Most Merciful.”2 It has been interpreted by some Sufis in an extraordinary way, 
unfitting  for  the  tenets  of  belief. Some of  them  who  were  ecstatics  even  considered 
man’s spiritual nature to be in the form of the All-Merciful. Since ecstatics are mostly 
immersed in contemplation and confused, they  are perhaps to be excused in  holding 
views  contrary  to  reality.  But  on  consideration,  people  in  their  right  senses  cannot 
accept ideas of theirs that are contrary to the fundamentals of belief. If they do, they 
are in error. 

Indeed,  the  Most  Pure  and  Holy  Deity,  who  administers  with  order  the  whole 
universe as though it were a palace or house, and spins the stars as though they were 
particles and causes them to travel through space with  

                                                 

463, 519. 

2 See, Bukhari, Isti’dhan, 1; Muslim, Birr, 115; Janna, 28; Musnad, ii, 244, 251, 315, 323, 434, 

 

140

wisdom and ease, and employs minute particles as though they were orderly officials, 
has  no  partner,  match,  opposite,  or  equal.  So  too,  according  to  the  meaning  of  the 
verse: 

There  is  nothing  whatever  like  unto  Him,  and  He  hears  and  sees  [all 
things],(42:11) 

He has no form, like, or peer, and there is nothing resembling Him or similar to Him. 
However,  according  to  the  meaning  of  the  following  verse  and  its  parabolic 
comparison, 

And  His  is  the  highest  similitude  in  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  He  is 
Exalted in Might, Full of Wisdom,(30:27) 

His  actions,  attributes,  and  names  may  be  considered.  That  is  to  say,  allegory  and 
comparison  may  be  used  in  connection  with  His  actions.  One  of  the  many  things 
intended by the above-mentioned Hadith is: “Man is in a form that displays the divine 
name of All-Merciful in its entirety.” Yes, as we explained before, the divine name of 
All-Merciful is manifested through the rays of a thousand and one names on the face 
of  the  universe,  and  is  apparent  through  the  innumerable  manifestations  of  God’s 
absolute dominicality on the face of the earth. Similarly, its complete manifestation is 
apparent in a small measure in man’s comprehensive form, the same as on the faces 
of the earth and universe. 

The  Hadith  suggests  also  that  the  evidences  of  the  Necessarily  Existent  One 
offered by such proofs, mirrors, and manifestations of the Most Merciful as animate 
creatures  and  man  are  so certain,  clear,  and obvious  that just  as it  may  be  said  of  a 
shining mirror which reflects the image of the sun: “That mirror is the sun,” indicating 
the clarity of its brilliance and evidence, so it has been said and may be said: “Man is 
in  the  form  of  the  All-Merciful  One,”  indicating  the  clarity  of  his  evidence  and 
completeness  of  his  relation.  It  is  in  consequence  of  this  mystery  that  the  more 
moderate of those who believed in the Unity of Existence said: “There is no existent 
but  He,”  as  a  way  of  expressing  the  clarity  of  this  evidence  and  perfection  of  the 
relation. 

O God! O Most Merciful One! Most Compassionate One! For the sake of “In 
the  Name  of  God,  the  Merciful,  the  Compassionate”  have  mercy  on  us  as 
befits Your Compassionateness, and allow us to understand the mysteries of 
“In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Merciful,  the  Compassionate”  as  befits  Your 
Mercifulness.  AMEN. 

 
 

 

141

SIXTH MYSTERY 

O  unhappy  man  afflicted  by  boundless  impotence and  endless  wants!  See  from 
the following how valuable and acceptable an intercessor is divine mercy. For it is a 
way  to  know  the  All-Glorious  Sovereign  in  whose  army  both  the  stars  and  minute 
particles serve together in perfect order and obedience – the Glorious Monarch of Pre-
Eternity and Post-Eternity, who is self-sufficient and utterly without need. He is rich 
without limit and in no way in need of the universe and its beings. The whole cosmos 
is  under  His  command  and  direction,  utterly  obedient  beneath  His  majesty  and 
grandeur,  submissive  before  His  sublimity.  That  is  divine mercy  for  you,  O  man!  It 
raises  you to the presence of the One who lacks all need, the Eternal Sovereign, and 
makes you His friend, addressee, and well-loved servant. But just as you cannot reach 
the sun and are far from it although it  fills  your mirror with its  light, reflection, and 
manifestation,  and  you  can  in  no  way  draw  near  to  it;  in  the  same  way  you  are 
infinitely distant from the Most Pure and Holy One, the Sun of Pre-Eternity and Post-
Eternity, and cannot draw near to Him, but the light of His mercy brings Him nearer 
to us.  

O  man!  Anyone  who  finds  this  mercy  finds  an  eternally  unfailing  treasury  of 
light.  And  the  way  to  find  it  is  by  following  the  practices  of  the  Most  Noble 
Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace),  who  was  the  most  brilliant 
exemplar and representative of mercy, its most eloquent tongue and herald, and was 
described in the Qur’an as a “Mercy to All the Worlds.” 

The way to attain to this embodiment of mercy who is a mercy to all the worlds is 
to  utter  the  prayer  calling  down  God’s  blessings  upon  him.  Indeed,  the  meaning  of 
this  prayer  is  mercy.  As  a  prayer  of  mercy  for  that  living  embodiment  of  divine 
mercy, it is a means of reaching the Mercy to All the Worlds (UWBP).3 So, make this 
prayer  the  means  to  the  mercy  to  all  the  worlds  for  yourself,  and  at  the  same  time 
make him the means of reaching the mercy of the Most Merciful One. 

The  whole  Muslim  community  in  all  its  vastness  uttering  this  prayer  which  is 
synonymous with mercy for the Mercy to All the Worlds (UWBP) proves in brilliant 
fashion what a precious gift is divine mercy, and how broad is its sphere. 
T o  C o n c l u d e : Just as the most precious jewel in the treasury of  

                                                 

3 See, Muslim, Salat, 11, 70; Tirmidhi, Witr, 21; Abu Da’ud, Salat, 36, 210; Witr, 26; Nasa’i, 
Jum’a, 5; Adhan, 37; Sahw, 55; Ibn Maja, Iqama al-Salat, 79; Darimi, Salat, 206; Riqaq, 58; Musnad, 
ii, 168, 375, 485; iii, 102, 445: iv, 8. 

 

142

mercy  is  the  Prophet  Muhammad  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace),  its 
doorkeeper, so is its first key “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate,” 
and its most easy key the prayer for the Prophet (UWBP). 

O  God!  Through  the  truth  of  “In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Merciful,  the 
Compassionate” grant blessings and peace  to  the  one  whom  You  sent as a 
mercy to all the worlds as befits Your mercy, and in veneration of him, and to 
all his Family and Companions. And grant us mercy so as to make us free of 
want  for  the  mercy  of  any  other  than  You  from  among  Your  creatures.  
AMEN. 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us. Indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

*   *   * 
 
 
 
 
 
The Fifteenth Flash 

 
 
This consists of the Indexes of Sözler (The Words), Mektûbat (Bediuzzaman Said 
Nursi – Letters 1928-1932), and Lem’alar (The Flashes Collection), from the First to 
the Fourteenth Flash. They have been included in the relevant volumes and not been 
published here. 

 
  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

143

The Sixteenth Flash 

 
 
In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 
 

 
Peace be upon you, and God’s mercy and blessings! 
My  Dear  and  Loyal  Brothers  Hoja  Sabri,  Hâf›z  ‘Ali,  Mes’ud,  the  Mustafa’s, 
Husrev, Re’fet, Bekir Bey, Rüştü, the Lütfi’s, Hâfız Ahmed, Shaykh Mustafa, and the 
others! It occurred to my heart to explain to you in concise informative fashion four 
small matters that have been the subject of curiosity and questions. 
 
THE FIRST 

Certain of our brothers like Çaprazzâde Abdullah Efendi had heard related from 
the  diviners  of  realities  that  this  last  Ramadan  a  relief  from  difficulties,  a  victory, 
would  occur  for  the  Sunnis,  whereas  it  did  not  occur.  Why  do  such  people  of 
sainthood and illumination make predictions that are contrary to reality? They asked 
me, and a summary of the reply I gave them, with which I was inspired, is this:  

It says in a Hadith: “Sometimes a calamity is visited on a person, but if it meets 
with  almsgiving,  it  is  repelled.”1  The  underlying  meaning  of  this  Hadith  shows  that 
while appointed events are going to come to pass under certain conditions, they do not 
occur.  That  is  to  say,  the  appointed  events  of  which  the  people  of  illumination  are 
aware are  not absolute, but restricted by certain conditions; if the conditions  are  not 
fulfilled,  the  event  does  not  occur.  However  the  event,  like  the  appointed  hour  of 
death, which is suspended, is written and determined in the Tablet of Appearance and 
Dissolution,2 which is a sort of notebook of the Pre-Eternal Tablet. It is only  

                                                 

1 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak,  i, 492; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 30; Tirmidhi, Zakat, 28; 

Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, viii, 261; al-Bayhaqi, Shu‘ab al-Iman, iii, 245. 

2 See, al-Nawawi, Sharh Sahih Muslim, xvi, 114; Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, x, 415-6. 

 

144

extremely rarely that  illuminations penetrate as  far as the Pre-Eternal Tablet; mostly 
they cannot rise that far. 

In  consequence,  predictions  made  as  a  result  of  interpretations  or  illuminations 
this last Ramadan and Feast of Sacrifices or at other times that do not occur because 
the conditions on which they were dependent were not fulfilled, do not give the lie to 
those  who  told of  them.  For  they were  determined, but did  not  come  about because 
the conditions were not fulfilled. 

Yes,  the  sincere  prayers  of  the  majority  of  the  Sunnis  that  innovations  in  the 
month of Ramadan be abrogated formed a condition and important reason. But since 
innovations had entered the mosques in Ramadan, they hindered the acceptance of the 
supplications,  and  the  relief  did  not  arrive.  Just  as  in  accordance  with  the  above 
Hadith, alms-giving repels calamities, the sincere supplications of the majority attract 
a  general  release  from  troubles.  Since  the  power  of  attraction  was  not  formed,  the 
victory was not given. 
 
SECOND CURIOUS QUESTION 

The last two months there has been a lively political situation in the face of which 
some attempt should have been made to alleviate conditions both for myself and the 
brothers  with  whom  I  am  connected.  While  there  was  a  strong  possibility  that  this 
could  have  been  achieved,  I  attached  no  importance  to  the  situation,  and  on  the 
contrary, had an idea in support of ‘the worldly’ who oppress me. A number of people 
were astonished at this. They said: “What do you think about the policies followed by 
those at the head of these innovators and in part dissembling people who torment you, 
so that you do nothing to them?” A summary of my reply is as follows: 

The  greatest  danger  facing  the  people  of  Islam  at  this  time  is  their  hearts  being 
corrupted  and  belief  harmed  through  the  misguidance  that  arises  from  science  and 
philosophy. The  sole solution for this  is  light;  it is to show light so that their  hearts 
may  be  reformed  and  their  belief,  saved.  If  one  acts  with  the  club  of  politics  and 
prevails  over  them,  the  unbelievers  descend  to  the  degree  of  dissemblers.  And 
dissemblers are worse than unbelievers. That is to say, the club cannot heal the heart 
at this time, for then unbelief enters the heart and is concealed, and is transformed into 
dissembling. And at this time, a powerless person like myself cannot employ both of 
them, the club and the light. For this reason I am compelled to embrace the light with 
all my strength and cannot consider the club of politics whatever form it is in. We are 
not charged with physical jihad at the moment, whatever that duty demands. Yes, in 
accordance  with  a  person’s  way,  a  club  is  necessary  to  form  a  barrier  against  the 
assaults of the unbelievers or apostates. But we only have two hands. Even if we had 
a hundred  

 

145

hands,  they  would be  sufficient  only  for  the  light.  We  do  not  have any  other  hands 
with which to hold the club! 
 
THIRD CURIOUS QUESTION 

Why do you violently oppose war, although, with foreign forces like the British 
and Italians interfering in the government recently, it would have excited Islamic zeal 
– the true point of support and source of moral strength of this country’s government 
–  and  been  a  means  to  an  extent  of  reviving  the  marks  of  Islam  and  repulsing 
innovations?  Why  have  you  offered  prayers  for its  being  settled  by  peaceful  means 
and come out fervently in support of the innovators’ government? Is this not indirect 
support of innovations? 

T h e  A n s w e r : We want relief, release, happiness, and victory, but not with 
the sword of the unbelievers. Let their swords be the end of them! We are not in need 
of any advantage proceeding  from them. In  fact  it is those obstinate Europeans who 
have set the dissemblers to pester the people of belief, and have raised the atheists. 

As  for  the  calamity  of  war,  it  would  cause  great  harm  to  our  service  of  the 
Qur’an. The majority of our most valuable, self-sacrificing brothers are under the age 
of forty-five, and would be forced because of war to leave their sacred service of the 
Qur’an and enroll  in the army.  If I  had the money,  I would gladly pay the thousand 
liras necessary to exempt each of such valuable brothers from military service. With 
hundreds of my valuable brothers leaving the Qur’anic service of the Risale-i Nur and 
laying  hands  on  the  club  of  physical  jihad,  I  feel  a  loss  in  myself  of  a  hundred 
thousand liras. These two years of Zekâi’s military service, even, have caused perhaps 
a thousand liras of his immaterial profit to be lost. Anyway... Like the One Powerful 
Over All Things sweeps and cleans in a minute the atmosphere filled with clouds and 
shows the shining sun in clear skies, so He may dispel these black, merciless clouds 
and  show  the  truths  of  the  Shari‘a  like  the  sun,  and  give  them  without  expense  or 
trouble. We await it from His mercy that He will not sell them to us expensively. May 
He  give  intelligence  to  the  heads  of  those at  the  top,  and  belief to  their  hearts;  that 
would be enough. Then matters would put themselves to rights. 
 
FOURTH CURIOUS QUESTION 

They ask: “Since what  you hold in  your hand is light, not a club, and light may 
not be objected to, nor fled from, nor can  harm  come from showing  it, why do  you 
advise  caution  to  your  friends,  and  prevent  them  showing  many  light-filled  parts  of 
the Risale-i Nur to people?” 

 

146

A  brief  reply  to  the  question  is  this:  the  heads  of  most  of  those  at  the  top  are 
drunk  and  they  cannot  read  them.  And  even  if  they  do  read  them,  they  cannot 
understand them; they give them the wrong meaning, and interfere. They should not 
be shown them until they come to their senses lest they interfere. There are also many 
unscrupulous people who out of spite or ambition or fear, deny the light or close their 
eyes to it. Therefore, I advise my brothers to be cautious and not to give the truths to 
those who are unfit,3 or do things which excite the suspicions of ‘the worldly.’4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

3 See, Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 17. 
4 An anecdote about an event that could have led to something serious: yesterday morning the 

son-in-law of one of my friends came to me. Joyfully, as one bearing good news, he said to me: 
“They’ve printed one of your books in Isparta and a lot of people are reading it.” I replied: “That 
prohibited one hasn’t been printed; a number of copies have been obtained by means of a hectograph, 
about which the government can say nothing.” And I added: “Be careful not to say anything about this 
to those two dissemblers, your friends. They’re looking for something to use as a pretext.” My friends! 
The man was the son-in-law of one of my friends, and in that connection may also be thought of as my 
friend, but because he is the barber he is the friend of the unscrupulous teacher and dissembling District 
Officer. One of our brothers apparently said something there without being aware of it, so it was a good 
thing that he came first and told me about it. I warned him and anything untoward was forestalled. And 
behind this screen the duplicating machine published thousands of copies. 

 

147

Conclusion 

 
Today I received a letter from Re’fet Bey. In connection with his question about 

the Prophet’s (UWBP) beard, I say this: 

It is established by Hadiths that the number of hairs from the blessed beard of the 
Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) was small. But despite their 
being few – for instance, thirty, forty, fifty or sixty – the fact that there are hairs from 
the  blessed  beard  in  thousands  of  places  caused  me  much  thought  at  one  time.  It 
occurred to me then that what is known as  his blessed beard consists  not only of  its 
hairs,  but  also  the  hair  of  his  blessed  head,  which  the  Companions,  who  neglected 
nothing,5  preserved  when  he  cut  it.  His  luminous,  blessed  hair,  which  would  be 
preserved for ever, numbered thousands and may be equal to what is now extant. 

I  also  wondered  at  that  time  whether  or  not  it  was  established  with  sound 
documentary  evidence  that  the  hair  found  in  all  mosques  was  the  Messenger’s 
(UWBP) hair so that it was acceptable to visit it. Then it occurred to me that it was the 
cause  of  visits,  and  of  benedictions  being  uttered  for  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace), and his being venerated and loved,6 and thus was not 
looked at for what it actually was. Therefore, even if the hair was not truly from the 
Messenger’s  (UWBP)  blessed  beard,  since  it  was  held  to  be  so  because  of  its 
appearance,  and  it  functioned  as  a  means of  veneration,  regard,  and benedictions, it 
did  not  have  to  be  authenticated.  So  long  as  there  was  no  definite  evidence  to  the 
contrary,  that  was  sufficient.  For  generally  held  opinions  and  the  acceptance  of  the 
Islamic community count as a sort of proof. 

If some of the pious object to such matters on grounds of fear of God, or caution, 
or  resolution,  they  do  so  in  particular  cases.  And  if  they  say  it  is  an  innovation,  it 
should be included among commendable innovations, for it is a means of benedictions 
for the Prophet (UWBP) being recited. Re’fet Bey said in his letter that the matter had 
led to an argument among the brothers. I advise my brothers that they do not argue in 
such  a  way  as  to  cause  differences  and  conflict;  they  should  grow  accustomed  to 
discussing things as an exchange of ideas, without arguing. 

 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

5 See, Bukhari, Wudu’, 33; Muslim, Hajj, 311-26; Musnad, iii, 133, 137. 
6 See, Muslim, Salat, 11, 70; Tirmidhi, Witr, 21; Abu Da’ud, Salat, 36, 210; Witr, 26; Nasa’i, 
Jum‘a, 5; Adhan, 37; Sahw, 55; Ibn Maja, Iqama al-Salat, 79; Darimi, Salat, 206; Riqaq, 58; Musnad, 
ii, 168, 375, 485; iii, 102, 445: iv, 8. 

 

148

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

 
Peace be upon you and God’s mercy and blessings. 
My Dear and Loyal Brothers from Senirkent, İbrahim, Şükrü, Hâfız Bekir, Hâfız 

Hüseyin, Hâfız Receb Efendi! 

The atheists have for a long time objected to the three matters you sent with Hâfız 

The  First:  According  to  the  explicit  meaning  of  the  verse,  “Until  when  he 
reached the setting of the sun, he found it set in a spring of murky water,”(18:86) he 
saw the sun setting in a hot, mud spring. 

The Second: Where is the barrier of Dhu’l-Qarnayn? 
The Third: This is about Jesus (UWP) coming at the end of time7 and killing the 

Tevfik. 

Dajjal.8 

The  answers  to  these  questions  are  lengthy,  so  indicating  them  briefly  we  say 
this: since the  verses of the Qur’an express matters in accordance with the styles of 
Arabic,  in  conformity  with  apparent  meanings,  in  a  way  everyone  will  understand, 
they frequently explain things in the form of metaphors, allegories, and comparisons. 
So to consider the verse, “set in a spring of murky water:” Dhu’l-Qarnayn saw the sun 
setting  on the  shores  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean, which  appeared  to be  a boiling,  muddy 
spring,  or  in  the  fiery,  smoking  crater  of  a  volcano.  That  is,  evidently  the  Atlantic 
Ocean  appeared  to  Dhu’l-Qarnayn  in  the  distance  as  the  large  pool  of  a  spring 
surrounded  by  a  swamp  which  in  the  intense  heat  of  summer  was  steaming  and 
vaporizing; he saw the sun’s apparent setting in a part of it. Or he saw the sun, the eye 
of the skies, being hidden in a new, fiery crater at the summit of a volcano which was 
spewing out rocks, earth, and lava. 

Yes,  the  All-Wise  Qur’an’s  miraculously  eloquent  expression  teaches  many 
matters  with  this  sentence.  Firstly,  it  explains  that  Dhu’l-Qarnayn’s  journey  to  the 
west coincided with the intense heat of summer, the area of a swamp, sunset, and the 
time  of  a  volcanic  eruption,  and  so  alludes  to  many  instructive  matters,  such  as  the 
complete conquest of Africa. 

It  is  well-known  that  the  sun’s  motion  is  apparent,  indicating  the  hidden 
movement of the earth and giving news of it. What it intends is not the actual setting 
of the sun. Also the spring is a metaphor. From the distance a  

                                                 

7 See, Muslim, Fitan, 110; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 59, 62; Abu Da’ud, Malahim, 14; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 33; 

Musnad, iii, 420; iv, 181, 226, 390; vi, 75. 

8 The Dajjal is the Antichrist, related to appear at the end of time. (Tr.) 

 

149

large  sea appears to be a small pool. It  is most meaningful and apt according to the 
mysteries  of  eloquence9  to  liken  a  sea  appearing  beyond  swamps  with  mists  and 
vapours  rising  from  it due  to  the  heat  to  a  muddy  spring,  with  word  ‘ayn, which  in 
Arabic means both spring, and sun, and eye.  It appeared like that to Dhu’l-Qarnayn 
because  of  the  distance.  So  too,  the  Qur’an  comes  from  the  sublime  throne  and 
commands  the  heavenly  bodies,  so  its  heavenly  address  stating  that  the  subjugated 
sun, which performs the duty of a lamp in this guesthouse of the Most Merciful One, 
is hidden in a dominical spring like the Atlantic Ocean, is fitting for its loftiness and 
sublimity; with its miraculous style it shows the sea to be a hot spring and steaming 
eye. And that is how is appears to heavenly eyes. 

I  n    S  h  o  r  t  :  The  use  of  the  term  “a  muddy  spring”  for  the  Atlantic  Ocean 
indicates that Dhu’l-Qarnayn saw that huge ocean as a spring due to the distance. But 
because the Qur’an sees everything from close to, it did not see what Dhu’l-Qarnayn 
saw, which was a sort of illusion. Indeed, since the Qur’an comes from the heavens 
and  looks  to  them,  it  sometimes  sees  the  earth  as  an  arena,  sometimes  as  a  palace, 
sometimes  as  a  cradle,  and  sometimes  as  a  page.  So  its  calling  the  vast  misty, 
vaporous Atlantic Ocean a spring shows its lofty sublimity. 
 
YOUR SECOND QUESTION 

Where is the barrier of Dhu’l-Qarnayn? Who were Gog and Magog? 
T h e  A n s w e r : Long ago I wrote a treatise about this question and it silenced 
the atheists. I do not have it with me now, and my memory is not working and helping 
me. Also, this question is discussed briefly in the Third Branch of the Twenty-Fourth 
Word.  We  shall  therefore  only  indicate  very briefly  two  or  three  points  about  it,  as 
follows: 

 According  to  explanations  given  by  investigative  scholars,  and  as  indicated  by 
the  title  Dhu’l-Qarnayn,  names  beginning  with  the  suffix  Dhu,  like  Dhu’l-Yazan, 
were  used  by  the  kings  of  Yemen,  so  this  Dhu’l-Qarnayn  was  not  Alexander  the 
Great.  He  was  one  of  the  kings  of  Yemen10  who  lived  at  the  time  of  Abraham 
(UWP)11 and received instruction from  

                                                 

9 In accordance with the mysteries of rhetoric the word “spring” (‘ayn) in “in a spring of murky 
water” makes a subtle allusion, as follows: after gazing on the beauty of divine mercy on the face of the 
earth, the eye of the sun in the face of the sky – and after beholding divine tremendousness above, the 
eye of the sea in the earth –  these two eyes close one within the other, and the eyes on the earth close 
also. Thus, with one miraculous word the Qur’an recalls this, and alludes to eyes resting from their 
duties. 

10 See, Abu Su’ud, Tafsir Abi Su’ud, v, 239-40; Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, vi, 385; al-Alusi, Ruh al-

Ma’ani, xvi, 27. 

11 See, al-Qurtubi, al-Jami‘ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, xi, 47; Ibn Kathir, Tafsir al-Qur’an, i, 180; iii, 

101; Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, vi, 382; al-Faqihi, Ahbar Makka, iii, 221. 

 

150

Khidr.12 Alexander the Greek lived approximately three hundred years before Christ, 
and was taught by Aristotle.13 

Human history goes back in regular fashion approximately three thousand years. 
This  deficient  and  short  view  of  history  is  not  accurate  concerning  pre-Abrahamic 
times.  It  continues  back  either  as  superstition,  or  as  denial,  or  in  very  abbreviated 
form.  The  reason  the  Dhu’l-Qarnayn  of  Yemen  was  since  early  times  in  Qur’anic 
commentaries known as Alexander,14 was either because it was one of his names and 
he was Alexander the Great or the Alexander of Ancient Times, or else the following: 
The  particular  events  mentioned  in  Qur’anic  verses  are  the  tips  of  universal 
events. Thus, through  his prophetic  guidance, Alexander the Great, who was Dhu’l-
Qarnayn,  built  a  barrier  between  some  peoples,  oppressors  and  oppressed,  and built 
the famous Great Wall of China to prevent the raids of those cruel enemies. Similarly, 
many powerful kings and world conquerors like Alexander the Greek followed in the 
path of Dhu’l-Qarnayn materially, while the prophets and spiritual poles, who are the 
kings of man’s spiritual world, followed him  in spiritual matters and guidance; they 
built  barriers  between  mountains,  one  of  the  most  effective  means  of  saving  the 
oppressed  from  oppressors,15  and  later  constructed  strongholds  on  mountain  peaks. 
They  founded  these  themselves  through  their  material  power,  or  through  their 
guidance  and  planning.  Then  they built  walls surrounding  towns  and  citadels  inside 
the  towns,  and  finally  they  made  machine-guns  and  Dreadnoughts,  which  were  like 
mobile citadels. The most famous barrier on earth, the Great Wall of China, covers a 
distance  of  several  days’  journeying  and was  built  to  halt  the  incursions  against  the 
oppressed  peoples  of  India  and  China  of  the  savage  tribes  known  in  the  Qur’an  as 
Gog and Magog, and otherwise known as the Mongols and Manchurians. These tribes 
several  times threw  the  world of  humanity  into  chaos.  Pouring  out  from behind  the 
Himalayas, they wrought destruction from east to west. A long wall was built between 
two mountains close to the Himalayan mountains which for a long time prevented the 
frequent  assaults  of  those  savage  peoples,  and  barriers  were  also  built  through  the 
efforts of the kings of ancient Persia, who resembled Dhu’l- 

                                                 

12 See, al-Qurtubi, al-Jami‘ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, xi, 47. 
13 See, Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, vi, 382-3; al-Shawkani, al-Fath al-Qadir, iii, 307; al-Khamawi, 

Mu‘jam al-Buldan, i, 184; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 17, 488. 

14 See, al-Tabari, Jami‘ al-Bayan, xvi, 17; al-Qurtubi, al-Jami‘ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, xi, 45; al-

Shawkani, al-Fath al-Qadir, iii, 307; al-Alusi, Ruh al-Ma‘ani, xvi, 26. 

15 There are numerous artificial barriers on the face of the earth that with the passing of time have 

taken on the appearance of mountains or have become unrecognizable. 

 

151

Qarnayn, in the mountains of Caucasia, in the region of Darband, to halt the inroads 
of  the  plundering  and  pillaging  Tatar  peoples.  There  are  very  many  barriers  of  this 
sort.  Since  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  speaks  with  all  mankind,  it  mentions  what  is 
apparently a particular incident, and recalls all events similar to it. It is from this point 
of view that the narrations differ concerning the Barrier and Gog and Magog, as well 
as the writings of the Qur’anic commentators about them. 

Furthermore, the All-Wise Qur’an switches from one event to another distant one 
due  to  the  association  of  ideas.  The  person  who  fails  to  think  of  this  association 
supposes the two events to be close in time. Thus, the Qur’an’s predicting the end of 
the world from the destruction of the Barrier is not because the two events are close in 
time, but to make two subtle points connected with the association of ideas. That is, 
the  world  will  be  destroyed  just  as  the  Barrier  will  be  destroyed.  Also,  just  as 
mountains,  which  are  natural  divine  barriers,  are  firm  and  will  be  destroyed  only  at 
the end of the world; so the Barrier is firm as a mountain and will be levelled to dust 
only  at  the  destruction  of  the  world.  Even  if  it  suffers  damage  from  the  assaults  of 
time,  it  will  mostly  remain  intact.  Yes,  the  Great  Wall  of  China  is  one  particular 
meaning  of  the  universal  meaning  of  the  Barrier  of  Dhu’l-Qarnayn  and  has  been 
standing  for  thousands  of  years  and  is  still  there  for  all  to  see.  It  is  read  as  a  long, 
petrified, meaningful line from ancient history, written by man’s hand on the page of 
the earth. 
 
YOUR THIRD QUESTION 

Brief replies concerning Jesus (Upon whom be peace) killing the Dajjal are found 

in both the First and the Fifteenth Letters, which should suffice you. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

152

 

Ali! 

In His Name! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

 
Peace be upon you, and God’s mercy and blessings. 
My  Dear  Self-Sacrificing,  Loyal, Conscientious  Brothers,  Hoja  Sabri  and Hâfız 

Your important question concerning the  verse at  the end of Sura Luqman about 
“the five  hidden  things”(31:34)16  deserves  a  serious  reply,  but  unfortunately  neither 
my present state of mind nor my physical condition permit it. I shall allude only very 
concisely to one or two points your question touches on. 

Your  question  indicates  that  atheists  who  have  deviated  from  the  true  path  of 
religion  have made objections and criticisms concerning the time of rain  falling and 
nature of the embryos in the womb from among “the five hidden things.” They have 
said:  “Instruments  in  the  observatory  can  discover  when  rain  is  to  fall,  so  someone 
other  than  God  knows.  Also  the  sex of  embryos  can  be  learnt  by  means  of  X-rays. 
This means it is possible to learn “the five hidden things.” 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  The  time  rain  falls  is  tied  not  to  any  law,  but directly  to 
divine  will.  One  instance  of  wisdom  in  its  appearance  from  the  treasury  of  mercy 
being dependent on a particular divine wish is as follows:  

The  most  important  things  in  the  universe  and the  most  valuable are  existence, 
life,  light,  and  mercy.  These  look  directly,  without  intermediary  or  veil,  to  divine 
power and a particular divine wish. With other creatures, apparent causes are veils to 
the  disposal  of  divine  power,  and  regular  laws  and principles  screen  the  divine  will 
and  wish  to  an  extent.  However,  no  such  veils  have  been  placed  on  existence,  life, 
light, and mercy, for the purpose they serve is not in force in those things. 

Since  the  most  important  truths  in  existence  are  mercy  and  life,  and  rain  is  the 
source of life and means of mercy, indeed is pure mercy, of a certainty intermediaries 
will not veil it, nor will laws and monotony screen the wishes that are God’s alone. In 
this way  everyone  in every  situation will  all the time be obliged to offer thanks  and 
worship  and  supplications  and  prayers.  If  rain  had  been  included  under  a  law, 
everyone would have relied on the law and the door of thanks and supplication would 
have been closed. 

                                                 

16 See, Bukhari, Istisqa’, 29; Tafsir Sura 6:1; 13:1; 31:2; Tawhid, 4; Musnad, ii, 24; 52, 58, 122. 

 

153

It is clear that there are numerous benefits in the sun’s rising, but since it is tied to 
a regular law, supplications are not offered for its rising and thanks are not given. And 
since  because  of  the  law  it  is  a  part  of  human  knowledge  that  it  will  rise  again 
tomorrow,  it  is  not  counted  among  the  matters  of  the  Unseen.  But  the  particular 
occurences  of  rain  do  not  follow  any  law,  so  men  are  all  the  time  obliged  to  take 
refuge at the divine court with prayers and supplications. Human knowledge has been 
unable to specify the times of precipitation, men therefore consider it a special bounty 
proceeding from the treasury of mercy alone, and truly offer thanks. 

In  consequence  the  verse  includes  the  time  rain  falls  among  “the  five  hidden 
things.”  Deducing  the  preliminaries  of  rain  with  instruments  in  observatories  and 
specifying  the  times  of  precipitation  is  not  knowing  the  Unseen,  but  knowing  by 
studying some of its preliminaries when it has emerged from the World of the Unseen 
and drawn close to the Manifest World. When the most hidden events of the Unseen 
occur, or when they  are close to occurring, they  may be perceived through a  sort of 
premonition. But that is not knowing the Unseen, but knowing that something exists 
or  is  close  to  existence.  In  fact,  I  sometimes  perceive  the  rain  twenty-four  hours 
before  it  arrives  due  to  a  sensitivity  in  my  nerves.  That  is  to  say,  the  rain  has 
preliminaries,  forerunners;  they  make  themselves  felt  through  a  sort  of  dampness, 
making  it  known  that  rain  is  to  follow.  Just  like  a  law,  this  situation  is  a  means  of 
reaching  matters  that  have  left  the  World  of  the  Unseen  but  not  yet  entered  the 
Manifest  World.  But  to  know  when  rain  will  fall  that  has  not  yet  set  foot  in  the 
Manifest  World,  nor  left  through  a  particular  divine  wish  the  treasury  of  mercy,  is 
peculiar to the One All-Knowing of the Unseen. 
 
THE SECOND MATTER 

Learning by means of X-rays whether a child in  the womb is male or female  is 
not  contrary  to  the  meaning  of  the  verse,  “And  He  Who  knows  what  is  in  the 
wombs,”(31:34) which refers to the Unseen. For what is intended by the verse are the 
preliminaries  of  the  child’s  particular  capacity  and  the  appointed  course  of  its  life, 
which  it  will  acquire  in  the  future,  and  even  the  wondrous  stamp  of  the  Eternally 
Besought One on its face – the child being known in this way is particular to the One 
All-Knowing of the  Unseen.17 Even  if a  hundred thousand X-ray-like minds of men 
were  to  combine,  they  still  could  not  discover  its  true  features,  each  of  which  is  a 
mark distinguishing the child from all the other members of the human  

                                                 

17 See, Bukhari, Bad’ al-khalq, 6; Anbiya’, 1; Muslim, Qadar,1. 

 

154

race. So how could they discover the non-physical features of its abilities, which are a 
hundred times more wondrous than its physical features. 

We  said  at  the  beginning  that  existence,  life,  and  mercy  are  the  most important 
truths  in  the  universe  and  that  the  most  important  station  is  theirs.  Therefore,  one 
reason  for  the  comprehensive  truth  of  life  looking  with  all  its  fine  points  and 
subtleties  to  the  divine  will  and  wish  and  mercy,  which  are  particular  to  God 
Almighty, is this:  

Since  life  together  with  all  its  faculties  is  the  source  and  means  of  thanks  and 
worship,  laws  and  monotony  –  which  are  a  veil  to  God’s  will,  and  apparent 
intermediaries – which screen His mercy, have not been placed on it. Almighty God 
has two manifestations in the physical and non-physical features of unborn children. 

One  shows  divine  unity,  oneness,  and  eternal  besoughtedness,  for  the  child 
testifies to divine unity by being similar to other human beings in respect of its basic 
members  and  human  faculties.  With  this  tongue  it  shouts  out:  “Whoever  gave  me 
these features and members is the Maker of all human beings, for they resemble me in 
regard to basic members, and He is the Maker too of all living beings.” 

This tongue of the child in the womb does not pertain to the Unseen; it may be 
known  since  it  follows  a  law  and  general  rule  and  the  species.  It  is  a  branch  and 
tongue of the Manifest World that has entered the World of the Unseen. 

The Second Aspect: With the tongue of the features of its particular capacity and 
its  individual  features,  it  proclaims  its Maker’s  choice,  will  and wish  and  particular 
mercy  and  that  He  is  under  no  restriction.  But  this  tongue  comes  from  the  deepest 
Unseen;  none  other  than  Pre-Eternal  Knowledge  can  see  it  before  it  comes  into 
existence,  nor  comprehend  it.  These  features  cannot  be  known  while  in  the  womb 
even if one or other of the child’s thousand members is seen! 

I  n    S  h  o  r  t  :  The  features  of  the  embryo’s  innate  capacity  and  its  physical 
features offer both evidence for divine unity and proofs of divine will and choice. If 
Almighty God grants success, a number of further points shall be written about “the 
five  hidden  things.”  But  for  now  I  have  no  more  time  and  my  condition  does  not 
permit it, so I conclude here. 

                                         The Enduring One, He is the Enduring One! 

                                                          S a i d  N u r s i 
 

Glory be unto You!  We  have no  knowledge  save that  which  You  taught us; 
indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

 

 

155

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

 
My Dear, Loyal, Curious Brother, Re’fet Bey! 
You ask in your letter about the ten subtle faculties. It is not appropriate to give 
instruction  in  the  Sufi  way  at  present;  there  are  in  any  case  the  works  about  them 
written by the learned shaykhs of the Naqshbandi Order. Our duty at the present time 
is to disclose mysteries, not to relate existent matters. Don’t be offended, I can’t give 
the details. I shall only say this much: Imam-i Rabbani defined the ten subtle faculties 
as the heart, spirit, inner heart (sirr), khafi, akhfa, and a faculty related to each of the 
four  elements  in  man,  and  he  discussed  briefly  the  progress  of  one  faculty  in  each 
stage of the spiritual journeying. 

I myself observe that there are numerous subtle faculties in man’s comprehensive 
disposition  and  vital  potentialities,  of  which  ten  have  become  famous.  The 
philosophers and literalist scholars made those ten faculties the basis of their theories 
in  another  form,  and  called  them  the  five  external  senses  and  five  internal  senses, 
these latter being the windows or samples of the ten faculties. In fact, man’s ten subtle 
faculties, which are well-known by both the learned and ordinary people, are related 
to  the  Sufis’  ten  subtle  faculties.  For  example,  if  such  faculties  as  the  conscience, 
nerves, emotions, intellect, desires, power of animal appetites, and power of anger are 
added to the heart, spirit, and inner heart, the ten subtle faculties are shown in another 
way.  There  are  many  other  faculties  in  addition  to  these,  like  the  sense  of 
premonition,  and  various  motive  and  appetitive  powers.  To  expound  this  question 
completely would be very lengthy, and as I have little time, I am compelled to cut it 
short. 

As  for  your  second  question,  about  the  aspect  of  things  which  looks  to 
themselves,  and  the  aspect  which  looks  to  their  Maker  (mânâ-yi  ismî  and  mânâ-yi 
harfî), they are explained at the start of all books on Arabic grammar. Moreover, there 
are  ample  explanations  of  them,  together  with  comparisons,  in  the  works  of  the 
science  of  reality  called  The  Words  and  Letters.  Further  discussion  would  be 
superfluous  for  someone  intelligent  and  exacting  like  yourself.  If  when  you  look  at 
the mirror, you look at it for the glass, you will intentionally see the glass; Re’fet will 
strike the eye secondarily, indirectly. Whereas if your purpose is to look at the mirror 
in order to see  your blessed face,  you will intentionally see lovable Re’fet. You will 
exclaim:  “So  blessed  be  God,  the  Best  of  Creators!”(23:14)  The  glass  of  the  mirror 
will strike your eye secondarily and indirectly. 

 

156

Thus, in the first instance, the glass of the mirror is ‘the meaning that looks to the 
thing  itself,’  while  Re’fet  is  its  ‘significative  meaning.’  In  the  second  instance,  the 
glass of the mirror is ‘the significative meaning’, that is, it is looked at not for itself 
but for another meaning; that is, the reflection. The reflection is ‘the meaning which 
looks  to  the  thing  itself.’  That  is,  it  is  included  in  one  respect  in  the  definition  “it 
points  to  a  meaning  in  itself.”  While  the  mirror  verifies  the  definition  of  its 
‘significative meaning,’ which is “it points to the meaning of another.”  

According  to  the  Qur’anic  view,  all  the  beings  in  the  universe  are  letters, 
expressing through their ‘significative meaning,’ the meaning of another. That is, they 
make known the names and attributes of that Other. Soulless philosophy for the most 
part  looks  in  accordance  with  ‘the  meaning  which  looks  to  the  thing  itself’  and 
deviates into the bog of nature. However, I do not have the time now for much talk. In 
fact,  I  cannot  even  write  the final  and easiest and  most  important  part of  the  Index. 
Convey my greetings to your study companions, in particular, Husrev, Bekir, Rüşdü, 
Lütfü, Shaykh Mustafa, Hâfız Ahmed, Sezâi, the Mehmed’s, and the Hojas. I pray for 
the blessed innocents in your household. 

                                                       The Enduring One, He is the Enduring One! 

                                                                              Your brother,  

                                                                            S a i d  N u r s i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

157

The Seventeenth Flash 

[This Flash consists of Fifteen Notes taken from Zühre.] 

Introduction 

Twelve years before this Flash was written,1 I wrote down in note form in Arabic 
in  such  treatises  as  Zühre,  Şu’le,  Habbe,  Şemme,  Zerre,  and  Katre,  a  number  of 
flashes  concerning  divine  unity  which  became  clear  to  me  through  dominical  grace 
during an unfolding of the spirit and progress of the mind and journey of the heart in 
divine knowledge. But since they were written to show only one tip of a lengthy truth 
and point out only one beam of a shining light, and since each was in the  form of a 
memento  and  reminder  for  myself  only,  their  benefits  for  others  were  limited,  and 
particularly as the great majority of my most select and special brothers were unable 
to  read  Arabic.  On  their  insistent  and  pressing  requests,  therefore,  I  was  obliged  to 
write  in  Turkish an  approximation  of  those  notes,  those  flashes,  in  part  expounding 
them  and  in  part  abbreviating  them.  Since these  notes  and Arabic  treatises  form the 
first of the New Said’s works proceeding from the knowledge of reality, which he to a 
degree  witnessed  in  the  form  of  illumination,  their  meanings  have  been  written 
unchanged. Because of this, a number of the sentences are included here despite being 
mentioned  in others  of the  Words.  And  some  are  not  expounded despite  being  very 
concise, so that the refinement of the original should not be lost. 

                                                 

1 Twelve years previously was 1340/1921. 

158

First Note 

 

 

 

 

I addressed myself saying: O heedless Said! Know that it is unworthy of  you to 
attach your heart to something that will not accompany you after this world comes to 
an  end  and  on  its  destruction will  part  from  you.  It  is  not  reasonable  to fasten  your 
heart to transitory things that will turn their backs on you and leave you when the age 
in which you live comes to an end, and will not befriend you on the journey through 
the  Intermediate  Realm,  or  accompany  you  to  the  door  of  the  grave,2  and  which, 
leaving you for ever after one or two years, will burden you with their sins and out of 
spite abandon you at the moment of accomplishment. 

If you are sensible, you will give up matters that will be shattered and destroyed 
under the blows of worldly revolutions and the stages of the Intermediate Realm and 
clashing  upheavals  of  the  hereafter;  which  are  not  able  to  accompany  and  befriend 
you  on  the  journey  to  eternity.  Give  them  no  importance!  Do  not  grieve  at  their 
passing! 

Consider your own nature; among your subtle faculties is one that will be content 
with nothing other than eternity and the Eternal One. It can address itself to none but 
He.  It  cannot  demean  itself  for  any  other.  Should  you  give  it  the  whole  world,  it 
would not satisfy that innate need. It is the sovereign of your senses and faculties. So 
obey it, for it obeys the All-Wise Creator’s command! Find salvation! 

Second Note 

 
I  had  a  true  dream  in  which  I  said  to  people:  “O  man!  One  of  the  Qur’an’s 
principles  is  this:  consider  nothing  other  than  Almighty  God  to  be  greater  than 
yourself to the degree that you worship it. And do not consider yourself to be greater 
than anything else to the degree that you become arrogant and haughty before it. For 
just  as  all  creatures  are  equal  in  regard  to  their  distance  from  being  fit  to  be 
worshipped, so too are they equal in regard to their createdness.” 

                                                 

2 See, Bukhari, Riqaq, 42; Muslim, Zuhd, 5; Nasa’i, Jana’iz, 52; Musnad, iii, 110. 

 

159

Third Note 

 
O heedless Said! You have illusions and see the exceedingly temporary world as 
undying  and  permanent.  When  you  look  around yourself  at  the  world,  you  see  it  as 
stable to a degree, and constant. Since looking with the same view you also consider 
your  own  transient  self  to  be  constant,  you  only  take  fright  at  Doomsday.  You  are 
only frightened at that as though you were going to live till then.3 

Use  your  reason!  You  and  your  personal  world  are  perpetually  subject  to  the 
blows of death and decline. Your illusion and sophistry resemble this comparison: if 
you have a mirror and hold it up to a house or a town or a garden, their images will 
appear in it. If the mirror is moved the tiniest amount or the smallest change occurs to 
it, the images become confused and distorted. The fact that the actual house, town or 
garden outside the mirror continue and are constant is of no avail to you, for the house 
in  the  mirror  in  your  hand  and  your  town  and  garden  are  only  in  the  scale  and 
proportions which the mirror gives you. 

Your  life  is  the  mirror.  The  support  and  mirror  of  your  world  and  its  centre  is 
your life. Every minute it is possible that the house, town, and garden will die and be 
destroyed, their condition is such that any minute they may collapse on your head and 
your doomsday will come. Since it is thus, do not burden this life and world of yours 
with loads they cannot raise and support! 

 
 

Fourth Note 

 
Know that it is generally the practice of the All-Wise Creator to return important 
and valuable things exactly the same. That is to say, renewing most things in similar 
form  in  the  alternating  of  the  seasons  and  changing of  the  centuries,  He  returns  the 
things  of  value  and  importance  exactly.  This  law  of  divine  practice  is  seen  to  be 
mostly unvarying in the resurrections of the days, years, and centuries. 

In  consequence  of  this  constant  law,  we  say:  since  according  to  the  agreement 
and  testimony  of  science,  man  is  the  most  perfect  fruit  of  the  tree  of  creation,  and 
among  creatures  is  the  most  important,  and  the  most  valuable,  and  since  a  human 
person is equivalent to a species of the other  

                                                 

3 See, al-Ghazali, Ihya’ ‘Ulum al-Din, iv, 64; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 368. 

160

 

 
 

animals,  it  may  be  surmised  with  certainty  that  at  the  supreme  resurrection,  each 
human being will be returned exactly the same, with his body and all his attributes. 

Fifth Note 

 
Western  science  and  civilization  had  to  some  extent  a  place  in  the  Old  Said’s 
thought, so when the New Said embarked on his journeys of the mind and the heart, 
they  were  transformed  into  sicknesses  of  the  heart  and  were  the  cause  of  excessive 
difficulties. The New Said therefore wanted to shake off from his mind that fallacious 
philosophy  and  dissolute  civilization.  In  order  to  silence  the  emotions  of  his  evil-
commanding soul, which testified in  favour of Europe, he was compelled to hold in 
his spirit the following discussion – which in one respect is very brief and in another 
is long – with the collective personality of Europe. 

It  should  not  be  misunderstood;  Europe  is  twofold.  One  follows  the  sciences 
which  serve  justice  and  right  and  the  industries  beneficial  for  the  life  of  society 
through  the  inspiration  it  has  received  from  true  Christianity;  this  first  Europe I am 
not  addressing.  I  am  addressing  the  second  corrupt  Europe  which,  through  the 
darkness of the philosophy of Naturalism, supposing the evils of civilization to be its 
virtues, has driven mankind to vice and misguidance. As follows: 

On my journey of the spirit at that time I said to Europe’s collective personality, 
which apart from beneficial science and the virtues of civilization,  holds in its  hand 
meaningless, harmful philosophy and noxious, dissolute civilization: 

Know this, O second Europe! You hold a diseased and misguided philosophy in 
your  right  hand  and  a  harmful  and  corrupt  civilization  in  your  left,  and  claim, 
“Mankind’s  happiness  is  with  these  two!”  May  your  two  hands  be  broken  and  may 
these two filthy presents of yours be the death of you! And so they shall be! 

O you unhappy spirit which spreads unbelief and ingratitude! Can a man who is 
suffering  torments  and  is  afflicted  with  ghastly  calamities  in  both  his  spirit  and  his 
conscience  and  his  mind  and  his  heart  be  happy  through  his  body  wallowing  in  a 
superficial, deceptive glitter and wealth? Can it be said that he is happy? 

Don’t you see that on feeling despair at some minor matter and his hope for some 
illusory  wish  being  lost  and  his  being  disillusioned  at  some  insignificant  business, 
such a person’s sweet imaginings become bitter for him,  

 

161

what is pleasant torments him, and the world constricts him and becomes a prison for 
him?  But  what  happiness  can  you  ensure  for  such  a  wretched  person  who  through 
your inauspiciousness has suffered the blows of misguidance in the deepest corners of 
his  heart to the very foundations of his spirit, and because of this whose hopes have 
all  been  extinguished  and  whose  pains  all  arise  from  it?  Can  it  be  said  of someone 
whose body is in a false and fleeting paradise and whose heart and spirit are suffering 
the torments of Hell that he is happy? See, you have led astray wretched mankind in 
this way! You make them suffer the torments of Hell in a false heaven! 

O evil-commanding soul of mankind! Consider the following comparison and see 
where you have driven mankind. For example, there are two roads before us. We take 
one of them and see that at every step is some wretched, powerless person. Tyrants 
are attacking  him, seizing  his property and goods, and destroying  his  humble house. 
Sometimes they wound him as well. The heavens weep at his pitiful state. Wherever 
one  looks,  things  are  continuing  in  this  vein.  The  sounds  heard  on  this  way  are  the 
roars of  tyrants  and  the  groans  of  the  oppressed; a  universal  mourning  envelops  the 
entire way. A person is afflicted with a boundless grief since due to his humanity man 
is pained at the suffering of others. But because his conscience cannot endure so much 
pain, one who travels this way is compelled to do one of two things: either he strips 
off his humanity and embracing a boundless savagery bears such a heart that so long 
as he is safe and sound, he is not affected even if all the rest of mankind perish, or else 
he suppresses the demands of the heart and reason. 

O Europe corrupted with vice and misguidance and drawn far from the religion of 
Jesus! You have bestowed this hellish state on the human spirit with your blind genius 
which,  like  the  Dajjal,4  has  only  a  single  eye.5  You  afterwards  understood  that  this 
incurable  disease  casts  man  down  from  the  highest  of the  high  to  the  lowest  of  the 
low,  and  reduces  him  to  the  basest  level  of  animality.  The  only  remedy  you  have 
found for it are the fantasies of entertainment and amusement and anodyne diversions 
which temporarily  numb the senses. These remedies of  yours are being the death of 
you, and so they shall be. There! The road you have opened up for mankind and the 
happiness you have given it resembles this comparison. 

The second road, the All-Wise Qur’an has bestowed on mankind; it is like this: 
We  see  that  in  every  stopping-place,  every  spot,  every  town  are  patrols  of  a  Just 
Monarch’s equitable soldiers doing the rounds. From time  

                                                 

4 The Dajjal: the Antichrist related to come at the end of time. (Tr.) 
5 See, Bukhari, Anbiya’, 48; Libas, 68; Ta’bir, 11, 13; Fitan, 26; Muslim, Iman, 273-6. 

 

162

to  time  at  the  King’s  command  a  group  of  the  soldiers  is  discharged.  Their  rifles, 
horses  and gear  belonging  to  the  state  are  taken  from  them  and  they  are  given  their 
leave papers. They are apparently sad to hand over their familiar rifles and horses, but 
in reality are happy to be discharged and extremely pleased to visit the Monarch and 
return to his court. 

Sometimes  the  demobilization  officials  encounter  a  raw  recruit  who  does  not 
recognize them. “Surrender your rifle!,” they say. The soldier replies: “I am a soldier 
of the King and I am in his service. I shall go to him later. Who are you? If you come 
with  His  permission  and  consent,  I  greet  you  with  pleasure,  show  me  His  orders. 
Otherwise go away and stay far from me.  Even if I remain on my own and there are 
thousands of you, I shall still fight you, and it would not for myself, because I do not 
own myself; I belong to my King. Indeed, my self and the rifle I have now are in trust 
from  my  owner.  I  shall  not  submit  to  you because  I  have  to  safeguard  the  trust  and 
defend my King’s honour and dignity!” 

This situation then is one of thousands on the second way which are the cause of 
joy  and happiness. You can think of the others for  yourself. Throughout the journey 
there  is the mobilization and despatch of troops with  joy  and celebrations under the 
name  of  birth,  and  the  discharge  of  troops  with  cheer  and  military  bands  under the 
name  of  death.  This  road  has  been  bestowed  on  mankind  by  the  All-Wise  Qur’an. 
Whoever  accepts  the  gift  wholeheartedly  travels  down  it  to  happiness  in  this  world 
and  the  next. He  feels  neither  grief  at  the  things  of  the  past  nor  fear  at  those  of  the 
future. 

O  second  corrupted  Europe!  A  number of  your rotten  and  baseless  foundations 
are as follows. You say: “Every living being from the greatest angel to the tiniest fish 
owns itself and works for itself and struggles for its own pleasure. It has the right to 
life. Its aim and purpose and all its endeavour is to live and continue its life.” And you 
declare  idiotically:  “Life  is  conflict,”  because  you  suppose  to  be  conflict  the 
compassionate,  munificent  manifestations  of  the  universal  law  of  the  All-Generous 
Creator which is manifested through plants hastening to the assistance of animals and 
animals  hastening to the assistance of man through a principle of mutual assistance, 
which is conformed to in perfect obedience by all the principal beings of the universe. 
How can particles of food hastening with total  eagerness to nourish the cells of 
the body – a manifestation of the principle of mutual assistance – be conflict?  How 
can  it  be  a  clash  and  struggle?  It  is,  rather,  mutual  help  at  the  command  of  a 
Munificent Sustainer. 

Another of your rotten foundations is, as you say: “Everything owns  

 

163

itself.” A clear proof that nothing owns itself is this: among causes the most noble and 
with regard to choice the one with the most extensive will is man. But out of the most 
obvious  acts  connected  to  man’s  will  like  thinking,  speaking,  and  eating,  only  a 
hundredth single, doubtful, part is subject to his will and is within his power. So how 
can it be said that he owns himself? 

If  the  highest  beings  with  the  most  extensive  will  are  thus  inhibited  from  real 
power  and  ownership  to  this  degree,  someone  who  says  that  the  rest  of  beings, 
animate and inanimate, own themselves merely proves that he is more animal than the 
animals and more lifeless and unconscious than inanimate beings. 

What pushes you to make such an error and casts you into this abyss is your one-
eyed  genius.  That  is,  your  extraordinary,  ill-omened  brilliance.  Due  to  that  blind 
genius  of  yours,  you  have  forgotten  your  Sustainer,  who  is  the  the  Creator  of  all 
things,  you  have  attributed  His  works  to  imaginary  nature  and  causes,  you  have 
divided up the Creator’s property among idols, false gods. In regard to this and in the 
view  of  your  genius,  every  living  creature  and  every  human  being  has  to  resist 
innumerable enemies on his own and struggle to procure his endless needs. They are 
compelled  to  do  this  with  the  power  of  a  minute  particle,  a  fine  thread-like  will,  a 
fleeting  flash-like  consciousness,  a  fast  extinguishing  flame-like  life,  a  life  which 
passes in a minute. But the capital of those wretched animate creatures is insufficient 
to answer even one of the thousands of their demands. When smitten by disaster, they 
can await no salve for their pain other than from deaf, blind causes. They manifest the 
meaning of the verse: 

For the prayer of those without faith is nothing but [futile] wandering [in the 
mind].(13:14)  

Your dark genius has transformed mankind’s daytime into night. And in order to 
warm  that  dark,  distressing,  unquiet  night,  you  have  only  illuminated  men  with 
deceptive, temporary  lamps. Those lamps do not smile at them with  joy, they rather 
smirk idiotically at their pitiful and lamentable state. Those lights mock and make fun 
of them. 

In the view of  your pupils, all living beings are miserable, calamity-striken, and 
subject  to  the  assaults  of  oppressors.  The  world  is  a  place  of  universal  mourning. 
Issuing from it are cries and wails at death and suffering. The pupil who has absorbed 
your  instruction  thoroughly  becomes  a  pharaoh.  But  he  is  an  abject  pharaoh  who 
worships  the  basest  things  and  holds  himself  to  be  lord over  everything  he  reckons 
advantageous.  A  student  of  yours  is  obstinate,  but  an  obstinate  wretch  who  accepts 
utter abasement  

 

164

for a single pleasure. He  is  so despicable as to kiss Satan’s  foot for some worthless 
benefit. And he is a bully. But because he has nothing in his heart on which to rely, he 
is an impotent bullying braggart. His whole aim and endeavour is to satisfy the lusts 
of his soul, to cunningly seek his own personal interests under the screen of patriotism 
and devotion, and work to satisfy his ambition and pride. He loves seriously nothing 
at all other than himself and sacrifices everything for his own sake.  

As  for  the  sincere,  wholehearted  student  of  the  Qur’an,  he  is  a  worshipping 
servant. But he is an esteemed servant who does not stoop to bow in worship before 
even the mightiest of creatures, and does not make the supreme benefit of Paradise the 
aim  of  his  worship.  And  he  is  mild  and  gentle,  but  at  the  same  time  noble  and 
gracious  and  lowers  himself  before  none  but  the  All-Glorious  Creator,  and  only 
stoops before the lowly with  His permission and at His command. And he is needy, 
but due to the reward his All-Generous Owner is storing up for him in the future, he is 
at the same time self-sufficient. And he is weak, but he is strong in his weakness for 
he relies on the strength of his Lord whose power is infinite. Would the Qur’an make 
its  true  student  take  this  fleeting,  transient  world  as  his  aim  and  purpose  while  not 
making him have even eternal Paradise as his goal? Thus you can understand how the 
two students’ aims and endeavours differ from one another. 

You  can  further  compare  the  zeal  and  self-sacrifice  of  the  All-Wise  Qur’an’s 

students with the pupils of sick philosophy as follows: 

The  student  of philosophy  flees  from  his  brother  for  his  own  sake  and  a  files  a 
lawsuit against him. Whereas, looking on all the righteous worshippers in the heavens 
and  on  the  earth  as  brothers,  the  Qur’an’s  student  makes  supplication  for  them  in 
sincere  fashion.  He  is  happy  at  their  happiness  and  he  feels  a  powerful  connection 
with  them  in  his  spirit,  so  that  praying  he  says:  “Oh  God,  grant  forgiveness  to  all 
believing men and women!” Furthermore, he considers the greatest things, the divine 
throne and the sun, to be subservient officials, and servants and creatures like himself. 
Also,  compare  in  the  following  the  loftiness  and  expansion  of  spirit  of  the  two 
students: the Qur’an imparts such a joyous elevation to its students’ spirits that instead 
of the ninety-nine prayer-beads, it places in their hands the minute particles of ninety-
nine  worlds  displaying  the  manifestations  of  the  ninety-nine  divine  names,  and  tells 
them to recite their invocations with them. Listen to the invocations of such students 
of the Qur’an as Shah Geylani, Rufa’i, and Shazali (May God be pleased with them)! 
See, in their fingers are the strings of particles, the droplets of water, the breaths of all  

 

165

creatures,  and  recite  their  invocations  with  them.  They  praise  and  glorify  God  with 
them and mention His most beautiful names. 

Behold  the  miraculous  instruction  of  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  and 
see  how  man  is  elevated  by  it  –  insignificant  man  who  is  stunned  and  confused  at 
some  minor  grief  or  tiny  sorrow  and  is  defeated  by  a  microscopic  germ.  How  his 
inner  senses  expand  so  that  the  beings  in  the  mighty  world  appear  inadequate  as 
prayer-beads for his invocations.  He considers Paradise to be insufficient as the aim 
of his invocations and recitations of the divine names, yet he does not see himself as 
superior to the lowest of Almighty God’s creatures.6 He combines the utmost dignity 
with the utmost humility. You can see from this how abject and base are philosophy’s 
students. 

Thus,  the  guidance  of  the  Qur’an  –  which  looks  at  the  two  worlds  with  two 
shining  eyes  familiar  with  the  Unseen  and  points  with  two  hands  to  the  two 
happinesses  for  mankind  –  says  concerning  the  truths  which  the  one-eyed  genius 
proceeding from the sick philosophy of Europe sees wrongly: 

O  man!  The  self  and  property  you  hold  is  not  yours;  it  is  in  trust  to  you.  The 
owner  of  the  trust  is  an  All-Compassionate  and  Munificent  One,  powerful  over  all 
things and with knowledge of all things. He wants to buy from you the property  you 
hold so that He can guard it for you and it will not be lost. He will give  you a good 
price for it in the future. You are a soldier under orders and charged with duties. Work 
in  His  name  and  act  on  His  account,  for  He  sends  you  the  things  you  need  as 
sustenance  and  protects  you  from  the  things  you  are  unable  to  bear.  The  aim  and 
result of this life of yours is to manifest  your Owner’s names and attributes. When a 
calamity comes your way, say: 

To God we belong, and to Him is our return.(2:156) 

That is to say, “I am in the service of my Owner, O calamity! If you have come with 
His permission and consent, greetings,  you are welcome! For anyway some time we 
shall  return  to  Him  and  enter  His  presence,  and  we  yearn  for  Him.  Since  He  will 
release  us  from  the  responsibilities  of  life,  let  the  release  and  discharge  be  at  your 
hand, O calamity, I consent to it. But if He has decreed your coming as a trial for my 
dutifulness  and  loyalty  in  preserving  my  trust,  then  without  His  permission  and 
consent  to  surrender it  to  you,  so  long  as  I  have  the  power,  I  will  not  surrender  my 
Owner’s trust to one not certainly charged to receive it.” 

Consider this one example out of a thousand and see the degrees in the  

                                                 

6 Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 9; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 19. 

 

166

instruction given by the genius of philosophy and guidance of the Qur’an. In reality, 
the  two  sides  proceed  in  the  manner  described  above,  but  the  degrees  of  people  in 
guidance  and  misguidance  differ,  and  the  degrees  of  heedlessness  differ.  Not 
everyone  can  perceive  completely  this  truth  in  every  degree,  because  heedlessness 
numbs the senses. In the present age it has so deadened them that the civilized do not 
feel  this  grievous pain  and  suffering.  However,  sensitivity  is  increasing  and  rending 
the  veil  of  heedlessness  due  to  developments  in  science  and  the  warnings  of  death 
which  every  day  displays  thirty  thousand  corpses.  Utter  abhorrence  and  a  thousand 
regrets  should  be  felt  for  those  who  take  the  way  of  misguidance  due  to  the 
Europeans’  idols  and  the  natural  sciences,  and  for  those  who  follow  them  in  blind 
imitation! 

O  sons  of  this  land!  Do not  try  to  imitate  Europeans!  How  can  you  reasonably 
trust  in  and  follow  the  vice  and  invalid,  worthless  thought  of  Europe  after  the 
boundless tyranny and enmity  it has shown  you?  No! No!  You who imitate them  in 
dissoluteness,  are  not  following  them  but  unconsciously  joining  their  ranks  and 
putting  to death  both  yourselves  and  your  brothers.  Know  that  the more  you  follow 
them  in  immorality  the  more  you  lie  in  claiming  to  be  patriots!  Because  to  follow 
them in this way is to hold your nation in contempt, to hold the nation up to ridicule! 

God guides us, and you, to the Straight Path. 
 
 

Sixth Note 

 
O  you  unhappy  person  who  is  alarmed  at  the  great  numbers  of  the  unbelievers 
and their agreement in denying some of the truths of belief, and as a result is shaken 
in  his  faith!  You  should  know  that  value  and  importance  do not  lie  in  quantity  and 
number.  For  if  man  is  not  a  true  human  being,  he  is  transformed  into  a  diabolical 
animal, and the more he increases in animal greed, the more animal he becomes – like 
some Europeans and their imitators. You can see that in number, men are extremely 
few in comparison to the countless animals, and yet they are sovereign rulers over all 
the animal species and vicegerents of the earth.  

The  harmful  unbelievers  and  those  depraved  wretches  who  follow  in  their  way 
are a vicious species among Almighty God’s animals which the All-Wise Maker has 
created for the development and prosperity of the world. He has made them a unit of 
measurement  in  order  to  make  known  to  His  believing  servants  the  degrees  of  the 
bounties He has bestowed on them, and finally will consign those animals to the Hell 
they deserve. 

 

167

There  is  no  power  in  the  unbelievers  and  misguided  denying  or  disputing  any 
truth  of  belief.  Their  agreement  lacks  power;  a  thousand  deniers  are  equal  to  one 
denier. Even if the whole population of Istanbul, for example, denies seeing the new 
moon at the beginning of Ramadan, the proven testimony of two witnesses invalidates 
that  great  multitude’s  negation  and  agreement.7  In  reality  unbelief  and  misguidance 
are  negation  and  denial,  so  are  ignorance  and  non-existence,  and  the  agreement  of 
large  numbers  of  unbelievers  even  has  no  significance.8  Since  matters  of  belief  are 
true  and  established,  and  their  validity  is  proven,  the  judgement  of  two  believers 
based on certain witnessing takes preference and prevails over the agreement of those 
vast numbers of the misguided. The reason for this is as follows:  

Superficially,  the  claims  of  those  who  deny  are  the  same  but  in  fact  they  are 
diverse and cannot unite and so gain strength. While the claims of those who affirm 
unite and receive strength from each other. This is because a person who does not see 
the new moon of Ramadan in the sky says: “In my view, there is no moon. It has not 
appeared that I can see.” And another says: “In my view, the moon has not appeared.” 
And so does another. Each says that in his view, there is no moon. Since the view of 
each  is  different,  and  the  causes  that  prevent  them  seeing  it  may  also  be  different, 
their claims are all different as well; each claim cannot reinforce the other claims. But 
those who are affirming it are not saying: “In my view and opinion the new moon is 
there,” but, “The new moon has actually appeared in the sky.” Those who sight it all 
make  the  same  claim  and  say:  “In  actuality...”  That  is  to  say,  all  the  claims  are  the 
same. But since the  views of those  who are denying  it  are all different, their claims 
also are different. They are  not making the  judgement according to what actually  is. 
Because  a  negation  of  what  actually  pertains  cannot  be  proved;  for  that,  an  all-
embracing proof is necessary. 

It  is  an  established  rule  that  “absolute  non-existence  can  only  be  proved  with 
extreme difficulty.”9 Yes, if you claim that a particular thing exists in the world, it is 
enough to merely point that thing out. But if you say it does not exist and you deny it, 
the whole world has to be sifted through in order to demonstrate it so that the denial 
can be proved. It is in consequence of this that the unbelievers denying a truth is like 
solving a problem or passing through a narrow hole or jumping over a ditch; it makes 
no difference  

                                                 

81-2; al-Marghinani, al-Hidaya, i, 121. 

7 See, Abu Da’ud, Sawm, 14; al-Sarakhsi, al-Mabsut, iii, 139-40; al-Kashani, Bada‘i al-Sana‘i, ii, 

8 See, Qur’an, 59:14. 
9 Ibn Qayyim al-Jawzi, al-Sawa’iq al-Mursala, iv, 1310; Idem., al-Ruh fi’l-Kalam, i, 198. 

 

168

whether  there  is  one  man  or  a  thousand, because  they  cannot  help  one  another.  But 
since those who affirm look at the heart of the matter and reality of the situation, their 
claims unite and the  individual strength of each  of them combines and assists all. It 
resembles lifting a great boulder: the more hands there are, the stronger they are and 
the easier it becomes.  

 
 

Seventh Note 

 
O  miserable  pseudo-patriot  who  fervently  encourages  Muslims  to  embrace  this 
world and forcibly drives them to European industry and progress! Beware, don’t let 
the  bonds  be  broken  that  tie  certain  members  of  this  nation  to  religion!  If  thus 
foolishly  blindly  imitating  and  crushed  under  foot,  their  bonds  with  religion  are 
broken, those irreligious people will become as harmful for social life as fatal poison. 
For the apostate’s conscience is completely corrupted and he becomes like poison in 
the life of society. It is because of this that according to the science of the principles 
of  religion,  “The  apostate  forfeits  the  right  to  life,  whereas  if  an  unbeliever  is  a 
member of the protected minorities or he makes peace, he has the right to life;” this is 
a  principle  of  the  Shari‘a.10  Furthermore,  according  to  the  Hanafi  school,  the 
testimony  of  such  an  unbeliever  is  acceptable,11  whereas  the  testimony  of  someone 
who has strayed from the path of the Shari‘a is rejected. For he is perfidious.12 

O miserable sinner who has deviated from Shari‘a! Do not look at the multitude 
of the dissolute and be deceived; do not say: “Most people think the same as me!” For 
the  depraved  do  not  want  to  embrace  depravity;  they  rather  fall  into  it  and  cannot 
extricate themselves. There is no sinner who does not want to be righteous and who 
does not want to see his superior and chief as religious. Other than if – I seek refuge 
with  God!  –  his  conscience  is  corrupted  through  apostasy  and  he  receives  pleasure 
from poisoning, like a snake. 

O crazy head and corrupted heart! Do you suppose that Muslims do not love the 
world, or that they do not think about the poverty into which they have fallen, and that 
they are in need of admonishment so that they do not forget their share of the world? 

                                                 

10 Bukhari, Jihad, 149; Tirmidhi, Hudud, 2; Musnad, i, 217, 282, 322; v, 231. 
11 al-Kashani, Bada‘i al-Sana‘i, ii, 254-5; vi, 266. 
12 See, Tirmidhi, Shahadat, 2; Abu Da’ud, ‘Aqdiyya, 16; Ibn Maja, Ahkam, 30; Musnad, ii, 181, 

204, 208. 

 

169

Your supposition is false, your surmise, wrong. Their greed has increased; that is 
the  reason  they  are  impoverished.  Because  for  Muslims,  greed  causes  loss  and 
indigence.  The  saying:  “The  greedy  is  subject  to  loss  and  disappointment”13  has 
become proverbial. 

Yes, there are many things calling and driving man to the world, like his soul and 
its appetites, and need, and his senses and emotions, and the Devil, and the superficial 
enticement  of  the  world,  and  false  friends  like  you.  While  those  who  call  to  the 
hereafter,  which  lasts  for  ever,  and  to  long-lasting  eternal  life,  are  few.  If  you  are 
patriotic  even  to  the  tiniest  degree  towards  this  nation  and  the  high  aspirations  you 
brag  about  are  not  lies,  you  should  help  the  few  who  call  to  eternal  life.  For  if  you 
silence them and help the many, you will be befriending Satan! 

Do you suppose this nation’s poverty is the result of a sort of religious asceticism 
or of laziness arising from abandoning the world? You are wrong to suppose that. Do 
you  not  see  that  the  nations  dominated by Europe,  such  as  China  and  the Brahmins 
and  Zoroastrians  of  India,  and  the blacks  of  Africa are  poorer  than  we  are?  And  do 
you not see that nothing apart from the most basic subsistence is left in the hands of 
Muslims?  The  rest  is  either  stolen  or  seized  by  the  European  infidel  tyrants  or  the 
dissemblers of Asia. 

You  should  be  certain  that  if  your  intention  in  forcibly  driving  the  people  of 
belief  to degenerate  civilization  in  this  way  is  the  country’s  law  and  order and  easy 
administration, you are mistaken and you are driving them down the wrong path. For 
it is more difficult to govern a hundred degenerates whose belief is shaken and morals 
corrupted, and to maintain public  security among them, than to govern thousands of 
the righteous. 

Thus, according to these principles, the people of Islam are not in need of being 
encouraged and driven to the world and to greed. Progress and public order cannot be 
secured in that way. They are rather in need of having their working conditions set in 
order, of  security  being  established  among  them,  and  of  having  the  principle  of  co-
operation  encouraged.  And  these  needs  can  be  brought  about  through  the  sacred 
commands of religion, and fear of God, and firm adherence to religion. 

                                                 

13 See, Ibn Qays, Qura al-Dayf, iv,, 301; al-Maydani, Majma’ al-Amthal, i, 24. 

 

170

Eighth Note 

 
O  idle  man  who  is  unaware  of  the  pleasure  of  effort  and  happiness  of  work! 
Know that out of His perfect munificence, Almighty God placed the reward for work 
within  it. He  included the wage for work within the work  itself. It  is for this reason 
that  in  their  particular  duties,  which  are  called  creative  commands,  animate  beings, 
and  even  from  one  point  of  view  inanimate  creatures,  conform  to  the  dominical 
commands  with  complete  eagerness  and  a  sort  of  pleasure.  Everything  from  bees, 
flies,  and  chickens  to  the  sun  and  the  moon  carry  out  their  duties  with  perfect 
pleasure.  This  means  there  is  an  enjoyment  in  their  work  so  that  they  perform  it 
perfectly,  although  they  do  not  think  of  the  results  since  they  do  not  possess 
intelligence. 

I f   y o u  a s k : “Living creatures have the ability to receive pleasure, but how 

can inanimate beings experience eagerness and enjoyment?” 

T h e  A n s w e r : Inanimate beings desire and seek a position, a rank, perfection, 
beauty,  and  order,  not  on  their  own  accounts  but  on  account  of  the  divine  names 
manifested on them. They become illumined and progress because in performing their 
natural duties, they become like mirrors and places of reflection of the names of the 
Light of Lights. 

For example, if, although they are unimportant and of themselves without light, a 
droplet of water or fragment of glass are turned with their pure hearts to the sun, they 
become thrones to the sun and smile at you. Similarly, by being mirrors in respect of 
their  duties  towards  the  names  of  the  All-Glorious  One,  who  possesses  absolute 
beauty and perfection, particles and beings rise from a very lowly position to a most 
elevated  degree  of  manifestation  and  illumination  like  the  droplet  and  fragment  of 
glass. Since they rise to a luminous and exalted rank by virtue of their duties, it may 
be said that if it is possible and they have the capacity to receive pleasure, that is, if 
they receive a share of general life, they perform their duties with perfect pleasure. 

For  clear  evidence  of  the  pleasure  to  be  found  in  the  performance  of  duties 
consider  your  own  members  and  emotions.  Each  receives  different  pleasures  in 
performing  the  duties  connected  to  your  personal  survival  and  the  survival  of  the 
human race. The duties themselves are a means of enjoyment for them, and to give up 
a duty is a sort of torment for a member. 

Further  clear  evidence  is  the  self-sacrifice  and  courage  which  such  animals  as 

cocks and hens with chicks display in performing their duties: even  

 

171

if  hungry,  the  cock  prefers  the  hens  to  itself,  summoning  them  to  feed.  It  does  not 
peck up the food itself but allows them to do so. And it is clear that it feels pleasure, 
pride and enjoyment in carrying out this duty. This means it receives greater pleasure 
from carrying out the duty than from feeding. The hen too will sacrifice its life for its 
chicks, throwing itself at a dog. It will also remain hungry and give them grain. That 
is  to  say,  it  receives  such  pleasure  in  its  duty  that  it  makes  preferable  the  pains  of 
hunger and pangs of death. 

Animal mothers receive pleasure in trying to protect their young, it is their duty 
when the  young  are small. When the  young  are  grown, the duty ceases and so does 
the pleasure. The mothers beat their offspring and take the grains of feed from them. 
Only, for human mothers the duties continue for some time, for due to their weakness 
and  impotence,  humans  are  always  children  in  one  respect,  and  are  all  the  time  in 
need of compassion. 

Consider the males and females of the animal species, like the mother hen and the 
cock, which acts as shepherd, and understand that they do not perform these duties on 
their own account, in their own names, or for their own perfections. For if they have 
to  sacrifice  their  lives  in  the  course  of  their  duties,  they  do  so. They  rather  perform 
them  on account  of  the  Munificent  Bestower  of Bounties,  the  All-Glorious  Creator, 
who employs them in their duties, in which, through His mercy, He includes pleasure. 
Evidence  that  the  wage  is  present  in  the  duty  itself  is  this:  plants  and  trees 
conform to the Glorious Creator’s commands in a manner that implies eagerness and 
pleasure.  For  the  fragrant  scents  they  disperse,  and  their  being  adorned  with 
decorations that attract the glances of their customers, and their sacrificing themselves 
for their shoots and fruits until they rot, shows to the attentive that they receive such 
pleasure in conforming to the divine commands that it rots and destroys them. 

Look, fruit-bearing trees like the coconut, which bears so many cans of milk on 
its  head,  and  the  fig,  request  through  the  tongue  of  disposition  the  finest  food  like 
milk from the treasury of mercy; they receive it and give it to their fruits to eat, while 
they content themselves with muddy water. 

In  seeds  also  a  longing  is  clearly  apparent  in  their  duty  of  germinating  and 
sending  out  shoots.  Like  someone  imprisoned  in  a  constricted  place  longs  to  go out 
into  a  garden  or  open  space,  such  a  longing,  such  a  joyful  state,  is  also  apparent  in 
seeds, in their duty of sprouting. 

It  is  because  of  this  long  and  mysterious  principle,  which  is  in  force  in  the 
universe and is called a divine practice, that those idle, lazy people who live in ease 
and affluence for the most part suffer more distress than those who strive and work. 
For the idle always complain about their lives and  

 

172

want to pass them quickly by indulging in amusements. Whereas the one who works 
and  strives  is  thankful  and offers  praise  and  does  not  want  his  life  to  pass  quickly. 
“The  person  who  lives  in  idleness  and  ease  complains  about  his  life,  while  the 
industrious  striver is  thankful”  is  a  universal principle.  It  is  also  for  this  reason  that 
the saying “Ease lies in hardship, and hardship in ease” has become proverbial. 

Indeed,  if  inanimate creatures  are  studied  carefully,  it  will  be  seen  that  on  their 
undeveloped innate capacities and abilities expanding from the potential to the actual 
through  great  effort  and  exertion,  a  state  similar  to  the  above-mentioned  divine 
practice  comes  about.  This  shows  that  the  natural  duty  produces  an  eagerness  and 
pleasure. If the  inanimate  creature partakes of  general  life, the eagerness  is  its own; 
otherwise it pertains to the thing which represents and supervises the creature. It may 
even  be  said  that  when  subtle,  delicate  water  receives  the  command  to  freeze,  it 
conforms  with  such  intense  eagerness  that  it may  split  iron,  breaking  it  into  pieces. 
That is to say, in conveying the dominical command of “Expand!” with the tongue of 
freezing  sub-zero  temperature  to  the  water  in  a  closed  iron  container,  it  breaks  the 
container with its intense eagerness. It splits the iron and itself becomes ice. 

You can make analogies with this for everything. From the rotations of the suns 
and  their  peregrinations  to  the  Mevlevi-like  spinning  and  turning  and  vibrations  of 
minute  particles,  all  striving  and  motion  in  the  universe  turns  on  the  law  of  divine 
determining  and  proceeds  from  the  hand  of divine  power  and  is  manifested  through 
the creative command which comprises divine will, knowledge, and command. 

Each particle, each creature, each living being, even, resembles a soldier who has 
different  relations  with  all  the  sections  of  the army  and  different  duties  that  look  to 
each; all particles and living beings are similar to this. For example, a particle in your 
eye has a relation with the cells of the eye, with the eye itself, the facial nerves, and 
the blood vessels of the body; and it has duties arising from those relations, and yields 
benefits in accordance with those duties. And so on, you can compare everything with 
this.  Thus,  everything  testifies  to  the  Necessary  Existence  of  the  Pre-Eternal  All-
Powerful One in two respects:  

The  First:  By  carrying  out  duties  far  exceeding  its  own  power,  everything 

testifies to the All-Powerful One’s existence. 

The  Second:  By  acting  in  conformity  with  the  laws  that  form  the  order  of  the 
world and principles that perpetuate the balance of beings, everything testifies to that 
All-Knowing  and  All-Powerful  One.  For  lifeless  things  like  particles,  and  tiny 
animals like bees cannot know order and balance, 

 

173

which are the  subtle matters of the Clear Book. How can a  lifeless particle and tiny 
bee read the subtle, significant matters of the Clear Book, which is in the hand of the 
All-Glorious One, who opens and closes and gathers up the levels of the heavens as 
though  they  were  the  pages  of  a  notebook?  If  you  crazily  suppose  the  particle 
possesses an eye capable of reading the fine letters of that book, you can try to refute 
the particle’s testimony! 

Yes, the All-Wise  Creator summarizes the principles of the Clear Book in most 
beautiful  form  and abbreviated fashion  and  with  a particular  pleasure  and through  a 
special  need,  and  includes  them  in  beings.  If  everything  acts  thus  with  a  particular 
pleasure  out  of  a  particular  need,  it  unknowingly  conforms  to  the  principles  of  the 
Clear Book. For example, the minute the mosquito with its proboscis comes into the 
world, it emerges from its house, and without hesitation attacks man’s face; it strikes 
it with its long staff causing the water of life to spurt out, and it drinks it. It shows the 
skill of a practised warrior in dodging the blows directed at it. Who taught the tiny, 
inexperienced,  newly-born  creature  the  science  of  war  and  art  of  extracting  water? 
Where did it learn it? I, that is, this unfortunate Said, confess that if I had been in the 
place of that mosquito with its proboscis, I could only have learnt this art, this warfare 
of attack and retreat, this extracting of water, only after lengthy instruction and much 
experience. 

Compare  with  the  mosquito  animals  like  the  bee,  who  receives  inspiration,  the 
spider, and the nightingale, who weaves his nest like a stocking, then compare plants 
to these animals  in  just the  same way. Yes, the  Absolutely Generous One (May  His 
glory be exalted) has given each living being a memorandum written with the pen of 
pleasure and ink of need, and with it has deposited in the being the programme of His 
creative commands and index of its duties. See  how the All-Wise One of Glory  has 
written on a receipt the amount concerning the bee’s duties, from the principles of the 
Clear Book, and placed it in the coffer in the bee’s head. And the key to the coffer is 
the  pleasure  particular  to  the  diligent  bee.  With  it,  it  opens  the  coffer,  reads  the 
programme,  understands  the  command,  and  acts.  It  proclaims  the  meaning  of  the 
verse, 

And your Sustainer has inspired the bee.(16:68) 

If  you  have  listened  to  the  whole  of  this  Eighth  Note  and  understood  it 

completely, through the intuition of belief you will understand one meaning of,  

And His mercy embraces all things,(7:156) 

and one truth of the verse, 

And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise,(17:44) 

 

174

and one principle of the verse, 

and one point of the verse, 

Verily when He intends a thing, His command is “Be!” and it is,(36:82) 

So glory  to  Him  in  Whose hands  is  the dominion  of all  things; and  to  Him 
will you all be brought back.(36:83) 

 
 

Ninth Note 

 
Know  that  among  mankind  prophethood  is  the  summary  and  foundation  of 
human good and perfections; True Religion is the index of prosperity and happiness; 
belief is sheer, transcendent good. Since apparent in this world are a shining beauty, 
an  extensive  and  exalted  good,  an  evident  truth,  and  superior  perfection,  self-
evidently truth and reality lie in prophethood and in the hands of prophets. While evil, 
misguidance, and loss are with those who oppose them. 

Of the thousands of merits of worship, consider only the following: the Prophet 
(UWBP)  unites  the  hearts  of  the  affirmers  of  divine  unity  in  the  prayers  of  the 
Festivals  and of  Friday,  and  worship performed  in  congregation.  He  brings  together 
their tongues in a single phrase so that one man responds to the sublime address of the 
Pre-Eternal  Worshipped  One  with the  voices,  supplications,  and  invocations  uttered 
by innumerable hearts and tongues. Strengthening one other, assisting one other and 
uniting,  those  voices,  supplications,  and  invocations display  so  expansive  a  worship 
before the Godhead of the Pre-Eternal All-Worshipped One that the globe of the earth 
as  though  recites  the  invocations,  offers  the  supplications,  and  performs  the  prayers 
with its regions, and conforms with its climes to the command of 

And be steadfast in prayer,(2:43, etc.) 

which  was  revealed  with  glory  and  tremendousness  from  beyond  the  heavens. 
Through this mystery of unity, man, a miniscule, powerless creature in the universe 
like a particle, by virtue of the vastness of worship becomes a beloved servant of the 
Creator  of  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth,  vicegerent  of  the  earth,  the  earth’s  ruler  and 
chief of the animals, and the result and aim of the universe’s creation. 

Yes,  if  the  voices  of  hundreds  of  millions  of people  proclaiming  “God  is  Most 
Great!”  after the  five daily prayers, and particularly  in the Festival Prayers, unite  in 
the Manifest World as they do in the World of the Unseen,  

 

175

the globe in its entirety becomes a huge human being. Since the “God is Most Great!” 
it proclaims with a mighty voice is equal to its own greatness, the believers in divine 
unity  proclaiming  “God  is  Most  Great!”  at  the  same  instant  in  unison  becomes  a 
mighty “God is Most Great!” uttered by the earth. The earth is as though shaken with 
a  great  tremor  with  the  invocations  and  glorifications  of  the  World  of  Islam  at  the 
Festival Prayers. Proclaiming “God is Most Great!” with all its regions and climes, it 
forms its intention with the pure heart of the Ka‘ba, its qibla, and on its uttering “God 
is Most Great!” with the tongue of Mount Arafat in the mouth of Mecca, that single 
phrase assumes a form in the air in the cave-like mouths of the believers in all parts of 
the  earth.  Just  as  through  the echo  of  the  words  “God  is  Most  Great!”  innumerable 
“God  is  Most  Great’s”  come  into  being,  so  too  that  acceptable  recitation  and 
invocation  causes  the  heavens  to  ring  out  and  resounds  rising  and  falling  in  the 
Intermediate Realms. 

We praise and glorify and exalt to the number of the particles of the earth the All-
Glorious  One,  who  made the  earth  thus prostrate  to Him  in  worship,  glorifying  and 
exalting Him, and made it a mosque for His servants and cradle for His creatures. And 
we  offer  praise  to  Him  to  the  number  of  beings  that  He  made  us  members  of  the 
community  of  His  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace),  who 
taught us worship of this kind.  

 
 

Tenth Note 

 
Know, O heedless, confused Said! If you are to attain to the light of knowledge of 
God  and  look  on  it,  and  are  to  see  its  manifestations  in  the  mirrors  of  signs  and 
witnesses,  and  behold  its  proofs  and  evidences,  you  should  not  examine  it  with  the 
fingers  of  criticism.  You  should  not  examine  critically  every  light  that  passes  over 
you or occurs to  your heart or appears to  your mind, or criticize it  with the  hand of 
hesitation. Do not stretch out  your hand to catch hold of a light that appears to  you! 
Rather withdraw from the things that cause  heedlessness, be turned to the  light, and 
wait. For I have observed that the witnesses and proofs of knowledge of God are of 
three sorts: 

One  Sort  is  like  water.  It  is  visible  and  palpable,  but  cannot  be  held  with  the 
fingers. For this sort, one has to detach oneself from illusions and submerge oneself in 
it as a whole. It cannot be spied on with the fingers of criticism; if it is, it flows away 
and is lost. The water of life cannot make the finger its dwelling! 

 

176

The Second Sort is like air. It may be perceived, but it is neither visible nor may 
it  be  held.  You  should  turn  towards  it  with  your  face,  your  mouth,  your  spirit,  and 
hold yourself before that breeze of mercy. But do not stretch out the hand of criticism 
towards it, for you will be unable to hold it. Breathe it with your spirit. If you look on 
it with the eye of hesitation and lay hands on it by criticizing it, it will escape you and 
depart. It will not make your hand its dwelling; it would never be content with it!  

As for the Third Sort, it is like light. It is visible, but is neither palpable nor may 
it  be  held.  So  you  should  hold  yourself  before  it  with  the  heart’s  eye  and  spirit’s 
vision;  you  should direct  your  gaze  towards  it  and  wait.  Perhaps  it  will  come  of  its 
own accord. For light cannot be held in the hand or hunted with the fingers; it can be 
chased  only  with  the  light  of  insight  and  intuition.  If  you  stretch  out  a  grasping, 
physical  hand  and  weigh  it  on  material  scales,  even  if  it  is  not  extinguished,  it will 
hide itself. For just as such light will not be consent to be imprisoned in matter, so it 
cannot be restricted, nor will it accept dense things as its lord and master. 

 
 

Eleventh Note 

 
Know that there  is much  kindness and compassion  in the Qur’an of Miraculous 
Exposition’s manner of expression, for the majority of those it addresses are ordinary 
people. Their minds are simple so to flatter them it repeats the signs inscribed on the 
face of the  heavens  and earth, since their  vision  does not penetrate to fine things.  It 
facilitates  the  reading  of  those  large  letters.  For  example,  it  teaches  signs  that  are 
clearly apparent and easily read, like the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the 
rain  being  made  to  fall  from  the  sky,  and  the  raising  to  life  of  the  earth.  It  rarely 
directs attention to the subtle signs written in small letters among the large ones lest 
ordinary people experience difficulty in reading them. 

There is an eloquence, fluency, and naturalness in the Qur’an’s styles whereby it 
is like a hafiz; it recites the verses inscribed with the pen of power on the pages of the 
universe. It  is  as though the Qur’an is the recitation of the book of the universe and 
the verbal expression of its order, and reads out the Pre-Eternal Inscriber’s attributes 
and writes His acts and deeds. If you want to see this eloquence of expression, listen 
with an aware and attentive heart to decrees like Sura ‘Amma14 and the verse, 

Say: O God! Lord of All Dominion.(3:26) 

                                                 
14 Sura 78, The Great News. 

 

177

Twelfth Note 

 
O my friends who are listening to these notes! You should know that the reason I 
sometimes  write  down  my  heart’s  prayers,  entreaties,  and  supplications  to  my 
Sustainer, which ought to be secret, is to request divine mercy to accept the words of 
my  writing  when  death  has  silenced  the  words  of  my  tongue.  Yes,  my  short-lived 
tongue’s  repentance  and  regret  is  insufficient  to  atone  for  my  numberless  sins.  The 
tongue of writing is permanent to an extent, and more effectual. Thus, thirteen  years 
ago,15 when as the result of a tumultuous storm of the spirit the  laughter of the Old 
Said  was  being  transformed  into  the  weeping  of  the  New  Said  –  at  a  time  I  awoke 
from the heedless sleep of youth in the morning of old age – I wrote these entreaties 
and supplications in Arabic. The Turkish meaning of a part of them is as follows:  

O  my  Compassionate  Sustainer  and  Munificent  Creator!  Due  to  my  mistaken 
choices my life and youth are lost and gone, and all that remains to me as their fruits 
are grievous sins, abasing sorrows, and misguiding doubts and scruples. I draw close 
to  the  grave  shame-faced  with  this  heavy  load  and  sick  heart.  Like  my  departed 
friends,  peers,  and  relations,  without  deviating  to  left  or  right  I  am  involuntarily 
approaching the door of the grave. 

The grave is the first stopping-place on the road leading from this fleeting realm 
to everlasting separation and all eternity; it is the first door opening onto it.16 But I am 
attached  to  the  realm  of  this  world  and  am  captivated  by  it,  and  I  have  understood 
with  absolute  certainty  that  it  is  transient  and  will  die,  will  perish  and  depart.  The 
beings  within  it  travel  on  convoy  after  convoy  and  disappear,  as  is  to  be  observed. 
This  world  is  exceedingly  cruel  and  treacherous,  especially  for  those  like  me  with 
evil-commanding  souls.  For  one  pleasure,  it  inflicts  a  thousand  pains.  For  a  single 
grape, it deals a hundred slaps. 

O my Compassionate Sustainer and Munificent Creator! As with the saying “All 
that is coming is close,”17 I see now that soon I will have donned my shroud, mounted 
the bier, bade farewell to my friends. Approaching my grave I call out to the court of 
Your  mercy  through  the  mute tongue  of  my  corpse  and  the  articulate tongue  of  my 
spirit: “Mercy! Mercy! Most Kind, Most Clement! Deliver me from the shame of my 
sins!” 

                                                 

15 Thirteen years before this treatise was written. (That is, 1920 or 1921 – Tr.) 
16 See, Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 5; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 32; Musnad, i, 63. 
17 Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 7; Darimi, Muqaddima, 23. 

 

178

Now  I  have  reached  the  brink  of  my  grave.  I  am  standing  at  the  head  of  my 
corpse stretched out beside it. Raising my head to the court of Your mercy, I cry out 
beseechingly  with  all  my  strength:  “Mercy!  Mercy!  Most  Clement!  Most  Kind! 
Deliver me from the heavy burden of my sins!” 

Now I have entered my grave, I am wrapped in my shroud. Those who came to 
send me on my way  have  left me  alone and departed. I await  Your forgiveness and 
mercy. I see clearly that other than You there is no place of refuge or succour. I cry 
out with all my strength at the ugly  face of sin, the savage form of rebellion against 
God, at the narrowness of the place: 

“Mercy!  Mercy!  Most  Merciful  One!  Most  Clement!  Most  Kind!  Just  Judge! 
Deliver  me  from  the  companionship  of  my  ugly  sins!  Broaden  my  place!  My  God! 
Your mercy is my recourse. Your Beloved, the Mercy to All the Worlds, the means to 
Your mercy. I complain, not about You, but about my soul and my state.  

“O  my  Munificent  Creator  and  Compassionate  Sustainer!  Your  creature  and 
servant  called Said is both rebellious, and impotent, and heedless, and ignorant, and 
sick, and base, and a sinner, and aged, and a wrong-doer, and like  a runaway slave; 
but forty years late he has repented and wants to return to Your court. He seeks refuge 
in Your mercy. He confesses his countless sins and errors. Suffering from doubts and 
every sort of affliction, he beseeches and entreats You. If out of Your perfect mercy 
You accept him, if You forgive and have mercy on him, that befits you. For You are 
the  Most  Merciful  of  the  Merciful.  If  You  do  not  accept  me,  whose  door  can  I 
approach?  What  other  door  is  there?  Other  than  You  there  is  no  sustainer  to whose 
court  recourse  may  be  made.  Other  than  You  there  is  nothing  fit  to  be  worshipped 
with whom refuge may be sought.” 

There is no god but You, You are One, You have no partner; the last word in this 
world and the first word in the hereafter, and in the grave, is: I testify that there 
is  no  god  but  God  and  I  testify  that  Muhammad  is  His  Messenger,  may  God 
Almighty grant him blessings and peace! 
 
 

Thirteenth Note 

 
This consists of five matters that have been the cause of confusion. 

T h e  F i r s t  M a t t e r  

Although  those  who  strive  on  the way of  Truth  should  think  only  of  their  own 

duties, they think of those that pertain to Almighty God, base  

 

179

their actions on them, and fall into error. It is written in the work Adab al-Din wa’l-
Dunya,  that  one  time  Satan  tempted  Jesus  (Upon  whom  be  peace)  saying:  “The 
appointed hour of death and all things are specified by divine determining, so throw 
yourself down from this high place, and see, you’ll die.” Jesus (Upon whom be peace) 
replied: “God tries his servants, but His servants may not try their Sustainer.”18 That 
is, “Almighty God tests his servant, saying to him: If you do that I shall do this. Let’s 
see, are  you able to do it?  But the servant does not have the right and power to test 
Almighty  God  and  say:  If  I  do  that,  will  You do  this?  To  assume  such  a  stance,  as 
though  subjecting  Almighty  God’s  dominicality  to  test  and  examination,  is  bad 
conduct and contrary to worship and man’s being God’s slave.” Since this is the case, 
man should do his own duty and not interfere in Almighty God’s business. 

It is well-known that when one of the heroes of Islam who many times defeated 
Jenghis Khan’s army, Jalaluddin Khwarazmshah, was going to the war, his ministers 
and  followers  told  him:  “You  will  be  victorious;  Almighty  God  will  make  you 
victor.” He replied: “I am charged by God’s command to act on the way of jihad, I do 
not  interfere  in  God’s  concerns.  To  make  us  victor  or  vanquished  is  His  business.” 
Because he thus understood the mystery of submission, he was wondrously victorious 
on numerous occasions. 

In  his  voluntary  actions  man  should  not  think  of  the  results  which  pertain  to 
Almighty God. For example, for some of our brothers, when people join the Risale-i 
Nur it fires their enthusiasm and makes them increase their efforts. Then when others 
do not listen, the weak ones among them become demoralized and their enthusiasm 
wanes  somewhat.  Whereas  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and 
peace), who was the Absolute Master, Universal  Leader, and Perfect Guide, took as 
his absolute guide the divine decree, 

No more is the Messenger bound to do than deliver the message,(5:99) 

and  when  people  held  back  and  did  not  listen,  conveyed  the  message  with  greater 
effort, endeavour, and earnestness. For in accordance with the verse, 

It  is  true  you  will  not  be  able  to  guide  everyone  whom  you  love;  but  God 
guides those whom He will,(28:56) 

                                                 

18 Mawardi, Adab al-Dunya wa’l-Din, 12; Ma’mar ibn Rashid, al-Jami‘, xi, 113; Abu Nu’aym, 

Hilya al-Awliya’, iv, 12; Ibn al-Jawzi, Talbis Iblis, i, 344; Ibn Hajar, al-Isaba, iv, 764. 

 

180

he  understood  that  making  people  listen  and  guiding  them  was  Almighty  God’s 
concern. And he did not interfere in God’s concerns. 

And so, my brothers! You shouldn’t be officious either by basing your actions on 

what is not your business, or take up a position testing your Creator! 

T h e  S e c o n d  M a t t e r  

Worship and servitude of God look to the divine command and divine pleasure. 
The  reason  for  worship  is  the  divine  command  and  its  result  is  divine  pleasure.  Its 
fruits and benefits look to the hereafter. But so long as they are not the ultimate reason 
and  not  intentionally  sought,  benefits  looking  to  this  world  and  fruits  which  come 
about  themselves  and  are  given  are  not  contrary  to  worship.  They  are  rather  to 
encourage the weak and make them incline to worship. If those fruits and benefits are 
made  the  reason  for  the  invocation  or  recitation,  or  a  part  of  the  reason,  it  in  part 
invalidates  the  worship.  Indeed,  it  renders  the  meritorious  invocation  fruitless,  and 
produces no results. 

Thus,  those  who  do  not  understand  this  mystery,  recite  for  example  the  Awrad 
Qudsiya Shah Naqshband, which yields a hundred benefits and merits, or Jawshan al-
Kabir, which yields a thousand, making some of those benefits their prime intention. 
Then they do not receive the benefits, and shall not receive them, and do not deserve 
to receive them. For the benefits may not be the reason for the invocation and may not 
themselves  be  intended  and  sought.  For  they  are  obtained  when  unsought,  in 
consequence  of  the  sincere  invocation,  as  a  favour.  If  they  are  intended,  it  damages 
the  sincerity  to  an  extent.  Indeed,  it  ceases  being  worship  and  loses  all  value.  But 
there is one matter, which is that weak people need something to encourage them to 
recite  meritorious  invocations.  If  they  think  of  the  benefits  and  eagerly  recite  them 
purely for God’s sake and for the hereafter, it causes no harm and is acceptable even. 
But because this instance of wisdom has not been understood, many of them come to 
doubt or even to deny the benefits narrated from the spiritual poles and righteous ones 
of former generations when they do not receive them.   

T h e  T h i r d  M a t t e r  

“Happy  is the man who knows his  limits and does not exceed them.”19 The sun 
has  manifestations  from  a  fragment  of  glass  and  a  droplet  of  water  to  a  pool,  the 
ocean, the moon, and the planets. Each contains the sun’s  

                                                 

al-Kubra, iv, 182. 

19 Bukhari, al-Tarikh al-Kabir, iii, 338; Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, v, 71; Bayhaqi, al-Sunan 

 

181

reflection  and  image  in  accordance  with  its  capacity,  and  knows  its  limits.  In 
accordance with its capacity, a drop of water says: “There is a reflection of the sun on 
me.” But it cannot say: “I am a mirror like the ocean.” In just the same way, the ranks 
of  the  saints  have  degrees,  in  accordance  with  the  variety  of  the  divine  names’ 
manifestations. Each of the divine names has manifestations like a sun, from the heart 
to the divine throne. The heart too is a throne, but it cannot say: “I am like the divine 
throne.” 

Thus,  those  who  proceed  reluctantly  and  with  pride  instead  of  knowing  their 
impotence, poverty, faults, and defects, and prostrating entreatingly before the divine 
court, which form the basis of worship, hold their miniscule hearts equal to the divine 
throne.  They  confuse  their  droplet-like  stations  with  the  ocean-like  stations  of  the 
saints. They stoop to artificiality, false display, and meaningless self-advertisement in 
order  to  make  themselves  fitting  for  those  high  ranks,  and  cause  themselves  many 
difficulties. 

I  n    S  h  o  r  t  :  There  is  a  Hadith  which  says:  “All  will  perish  save  those  who 
know,  and  those  who  know  will  perish  save  those  who  act,  and  those  who  act  will 
perish save the sincere, and the sincere are in grave danger.”20 That is to say, the only 
means of salvation and deliverance is sincerity. It is of the greatest importance to gain 
sincerity.  The  tiniest  act  performed  with  sincerity  is  preferable  to  tons  performed 
without  sincerity.21  A  person  should  understand  that  what  gains  sincerity  for  his 
actions  is  his  doing  them  purely  because  they  are  a  divine  command  and  that  their 
result is divine pleasure, and he should not interfere in God’s business. 

There is sincerity in everything. A jot of love, even, with sincerity is superior to 
tons of official love for which return is wanted. Someone described this sincere love 
as  follows:  “I  do  not  want  a  bribe,  recompense,  return  or  reward  for  love,  for  love 
which seeks recompense is weak and short-lived.”22 Sincere love has been lodged in 
human  nature  and  in  all  mothers.  The  compassion  of  mothers  manifests  this  sincere 
love  in  its  true  meaning.  Evidence  that  through  the  mystery  of  this  compassion 
mothers do not want or seek a reward or bribe for their love of their children, is their 
readiness to sacrifice their lives and even their eternal happiness for them. All a hen’s 
capital is its life, and one hen sacrificed its head in order to save its chick’s head from 
the jaws of a dog – as Hüsrev witnessed. 

                                                 

20 See, al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 415; al-Ghazali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, iii, 414; iv, 179, 362. 
21 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 341; Abu Nu’aym, al-Hilya al-Awliya’, i, 244. 
22 See, Ibn Qays, Qura al-Dayf, i, 95, 207; al-Dhahabi, Tarikh al-Islam, 103. 

 

182

T h e  F o u r t h  M a t t e r  

One should not accept bounties which arrive at the hands of apparent causes on 
account of the causes. If a cause like an animal or a tree does not possess will, it gives 
the  bounty  directly  on  account  of  Almighty  God.  It  says:  “In  the  Name  of  God” 
through the tongue of disposition and gives it to you. So you too should say: “In the 
Name of God,” and take it for God’s sake. If the cause possesses will, he should say: 
“In the Name of God,” and you may accept it, otherwise  you should refuse it. Apart 
from its explicit meaning, the verse, 

Eat not of [meats] on which God’s name has not been pronounced,(6:121) 

has  an  implicit  meaning:  Do  not  partake  of  bounties  that  do  not  recall  the  True 
Bestower of Bounties and are not given in His name.  

Since this is so, both the one who gives and the one who receives should say “In 
the  name of God.” If the giver does not say it and  you are in  need,  you say, “In the 
Name of God,” and seeing the hand of divine mercy upon him, kiss it in thanks, and 
take the bounty  from him. That is to say,  look from the bounty to the bestowal, and 
from  the  bestowal  think  of  the  True  Bestower.  To  reflect  in  this  way  is  a  sort  of 
thanks. Then  if  you wish, offer a prayer  for the apparent means, since  it  was by  his 
hand that the bounty was sent to you. 

What  deceives  those  who  worship  apparent  causes  is  the  two  things  coming 
together or being together, which is called ‘association;’ they suppose the two things 
cause  one  another.  Also,  since  the  non-existence  of  one  thing  is  the  cause  of  a 
bounty’s non-existence, they suppose that the thing’s existence is also the cause of the 
bounty’s  existence.  They  offer  their  thanks  and  gratitude  to  the  thing  and  fall  into 
error.  For  a  bounty’s  existence  results  from  all  the  bounty’s  conditions  and 
preliminaries. Whereas the bounty’s  non-existence occurs through the non-existence 
of only a single condition. 

For  example,  someone  who  does  not  open  the  canal  to  water  the  garden  is  the 
reason and cause of the garden drying up and the non-existence of bounties. But the 
existence of the garden’s bounties is dependent on hundreds of conditions besides the 
man’s  duty  and  the  bounties  come  into  being  through  dominical  will  and  power, 
which  are the  true  cause. So understand  just  how  clear  is the  error of  this  sophistry 
and how mistaken are those who worship causes! 

Yes, ‘association’ is one thing and the cause is another. You receive a bounty, but 

the intention of a person to bestow it on you was the ‘associate’  

 

183

of the bounty, not the cause. The cause was divine mercy. If the man had not intended 
to  give  you  the  bounty,  you  would  not  have  received  it  and  it  would  have  been  the 
cause of the bounty’s non-existence. But in consequence of the above rule, the desire 
to bestow  cannot be the  cause  of the  bounty;  it  can  only  be  one  out of  hundreds  of 
conditions. 

For  example,  some  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  (like  Hüsrev  and  Re’fet)  who 
have  received  Almighty  God’s  bounties  have  confused  the  ‘association’  and  the 
cause,  and  have  been  over-grateful  to  their  Master.  However,  Almighty  God  put 
together the bounty of benefiting from the Qur’anic instruction which He bestowed on 
them,  and  the  bounty  of  instructing  which  He  had  bestowed  on  their  Master;  He 
‘associated’ the two. They say: “If our Master had not come here, we would not have 
received this instruction, so his instruction is the cause of our benefiting.” However, I 
say:  

“Brothers!  The  bounties  Almighty  God  bestowed  on  you  and  on  me  arrived 
together. The cause of both bounties is divine mercy. Like you, I at one time confused 
the  association  with  the  cause,  and  felt  much  gratitude  towards  the  hundreds  of 
Risale-i Nur students with diamond pens  like  yourselves. I would say: ‘If  it  had not 
been for them, how could have a semi-literate unfortunate like myself have performed 
this  service?’  Then  I  understood  that  after  bestowing  on  you  the  sacred  bounty  by 
means of the pen, He bestowed on me success in this service. He associated the two; 
they were not the cause of each other. I do not thank you, but congratulate you. You 
too pray for me and congratulate me, rather than being grateful to me.” 

It may be understood from this Fourth Matter just how many degrees there are in 

heedlessness. 

T h e  F i f t h  M a t t e r  

Just as if the property of a community is given to one man, it is wrong; or if one 
man  lays  hands  on  charitable  foundations  which  belong  to  the  community,  he  does 
wrong;  so  too  to  ascribe  to  the  leader  or  master  of  a  community  the  results  of  that 
community’s  labours  or  the  honour  and  merits  resulting  from  its  good  works,  is 
wrong both for the community and for the leader or master. Because to do so flatters 
his egotism and encourages pride. While being the door-keeper, he supposes himself 
to be the king. He also does wrong to himself. Indeed, he opens the way to a sort of 
concealed association of partners with God. 

Yes, the colonel cannot claim for himself the booty, victory, and glory belonging 
to a regiment which conquers a citadel. The master and spiritual guide should not be 
considered to be the source and origin, but known to be  

 

184

the  place  of  reflection  and  manifestation.  For  example,  heat  and  light  reach  you  by 
means of a mirror. It would be crazy if you forget the sun, and considering the mirror 
to  be  the  source,  are  grateful  to  it  instead  of  being  grateful  to  the  sun.  The  mirror 
should be preserved because it is the place of manifestation. Thus, the guide’s spirit 
and heart are a mirror; they are the place for reflecting the effulgence emanating from 
Almighty God. He is the means of its being reflected to his followers. He should not 
be ascribed a station higher with regard to the effulgence than that of being the means. 
It  sometimes  even  happens  that  a  master  considered  to  be  the  source  is  neither  the 
place  of  manifestation  nor  the  source.  The  follower  supposes  the  effulgences  he 
receives  due  to  the  purity  of  his  sincerity,  or  his  strength  of  attachment,  or  his 
concentration  on  his master,  or  in  other  ways,  to  have  come  from the  mirror of  his 
master’s  spirit.  Like  by  means  of  mesmerism,  some  people  open  up  a  window onto 
the  World  of Similitudes by  gazing  attentively  at  a  mirror,  and  observe  strange  and 
wonderful  things  in  the  mirror.  But  they  are  not  in  the  mirror;  by  focussing  their 
attention  on  the  mirror,  a  window opens  up  in  their imaginations  outside  the mirror 
and they see those things. It is for this reason that sometimes the sincere student may 
be more advanced than a deficient shaykh. He returns, guides his shaykh and becomes 
the shaykh’s shaykh. 

 
 

Fourteenth Note 

 
This consists of four short signs alluding to divine unity. 

F i r s t  S i g n  

O  worshipper  of  causes!  You  see  a  wondrous  palace  fashioned  of  rare  jewels 
which  is  being  made.  Some of  the  jewels  used in  its  construction  are  found only  in 
China;  others  in  Andalusia;  others  in  Yemen;  while  others  are  found  nowhere  but 
Siberia.  If  you  see  that  as  it  is  being  made,  the  precious  stones  are  summoned  that 
same day from north, south, east, and west, would you have any doubt that the master 
builder making the palace was a miracle-worker who ruled the whole earth? 

Thus, every animal is a divine palace, and man is the finest and most wondrous of 
the  palaces.  Some  of  the  jewels  in  the  palace  called  man  come  from  the  World  of 
Spirits,  others  from  the  World  of  Similitudes  and  the  Preserved  Tablet,  and  others 
from the world of the air, the world of light, and the world of the elements. He is also 
a wondrous palace whose needs stretch to eternity, whose hopes have spread to all the 
regions of the heavens  

 

185

and the earth, and who has relations and ties with all the epochs of this world and the 
hereafter.  

O  you  who  considers  yourself  to be a true  man!  Since  your  true  nature  is  thus, 
you  can  only  be  made  by  One  for  whom  this  world  and  the  hereafter  are  each  a 
dwelling, the earth and the skies each a page, and who has disposal over pre-eternity 
and  post-eternity  as  though  they  were  yesterday  and  tomorrow.  In  which  case,  the 
only being fit to be worshipped by man, and his place of recourse and saviour, can be 
one  who  rules  the  earth  and  the  heavens,  and  holds  the  reins  of  this  world  and  the 
next. 

S e c o n d  S i g n  

There  are  certain  foolish  people  who  because  they  do  not  recognize  the  sun,  if 
they  see  it  in  a  mirror,  start  to  love  the  mirror.  With  intense  emotion  they  try  to 
preserve  the  mirror  so  that  the  sun  within  it  will  not  be  lost.  Whenever  the  foolish 
person realizes that the sun does not die on the  mirror’s dying and  is  not lost on  its 
being broken, he turns all his love to the sun in the sky. He understands then that the 
sun appearing in the mirror is not dependent on the mirror, and its continued existence 
does not depend on it. It is rather the sun that holds the mirror and supplies its shining 
light.  The sun’s  continuance  is  not  dependent  on  the  mirror; the  continuance  of  the 
mirror’s living brilliance is dependent on the sun’s manifestation. 

O  man!  Your  heart,  identity,  and  nature  are  a  mirror.  The  intense  love  of 
immortality in  your nature and heart should be not for the mirror, nor for your heart 
and  nature,  but  for  the  manifestation  of  the  Enduring  One  of  Glory  whose 
manifestation  is reflected in the mirror according  to the mirror’s capacity.  However, 
out of stupidity that love of yours is directed to other places. Since it is thus, say: “O 
Enduring One! You alone are Enduring!” That is, “Since You exist and are enduring, 
whatever  transience  and  non-existence  want  to  inflict  on  us,  let  them,  it  is  of  no 
importance!” 

T h i r d  S i g n  

O  man!  The  strangest  state  the  All-Wise  Creator has  included  in  your  nature  is 
your  inability  to  settle  in  the  whole  world;  like  someone  suffocating  in  prison,  you 
gasp  for  somewhere  wider  than  the  world.  Yet  you  enter  the  minutest  matter,  a 
memory, a moment, and settle  in it. Your heart and mind which cannot settle  in the 
vast  world settle  in  that  jot.  You  wander  about  with  your  intensest  emotions  in  that 
brief moment, that tiny memory. 

And He lodged in your nature such immaterial powers and subtle faculties that if 
some  of  them  devoured  the  world,  they  would  not  be  satisfied;  and  some  of  them 
cannot sustain even a minute particle within themselves. Like the eye cannot bear a 
hair although the head can bear heavy stones,  

 

186

those faculties cannot bear the weight of even a hair, that is, some insignificant state 
arising from heedlessness and misguidance. They are sometimes extinguished and die 
even. 

Since  it  is thus, be careful, tread with caution, be frightened of sinking! Do  not 
drown  in  a  mouthful,  a  word,  a  seed,  a  flash,  a  sign,  a  kiss!  Do  not  plunge  your 
extensive faculties, which can swallow the world, in such a thing. For there are things 
which are very small that can in one respect swallow things which are very large. The 
sky together with  its stars can enter a small fragment of glass and be drowned. And 
most  of  the  pages  of  your  actions  and  leaves  of  your  life  enter  your  faculty  of 
memory, tiny as a mustard-seed. So too there are tiny things that swallow things thus 
large, and contain them. 

F o u r t h  S i g n  

O  world-worshipping  man!  You  conceive  of  your  world  as  very  broad,  yet  it 
resembles a narrow grave. But since the walls of that narrow grave-like dwelling are 
of glass, they are reflected one within the other and stretch as far as the eye can see. 
While  being  narrow  as  the  grave,  your  world  appears  to be  as  large  as  a  town.  For 
despite  both  the  right  wall,  which  is  the  past,  and  the  left  wall,  which  is  the  future, 
being  non-existent,  they  are  reflected  one  within  the  other,  unfolding  the  wings  of 
present  time,  which  is  extremely  brief  and  narrow.  Reality  mixes  with  imagination, 
and you suppose a non-existent world to be existent. 

On being spun round at speed, a line appears to be broad like a surface, despite in 
reality  being  a  fine  line.  Your  world  too  is  in  reality  narrow,  but  due  to  your 
heedlessness, delusions, and imagination, its walls have drawn far apart. If driven by a 
calamity you stir in that narrow world, you will hit your head on the wall, which you 
supposed to be distant. It will dispel the illusions in your head and banish your sleep. 
Then you will see that that broad world of yours is narrower than the grave, finer than 
the Bridge of Sirat. Your life passes faster than lightning, it pours away more swiftly 
than tea. 

Since worldly life and the life of the flesh and animal life are thus, shake free of 
animality, leave behind corporeality, enter the level of life of the heart and spirit! You 
will  find a sphere of  life, a world of light,  far broader than the world  you imagined 
was broad. The key to that world is to make the heart utter the sacred words “There is 
no god but God,” which express the mysteries of divine unity and knowledge of God, 
and to make the spirit work them. 

 

187

Fifteenth Note 

 
This consists of three matters.23 

T h e  F i r s t  M a t t e r  

This is the verse 

And whoever has done an atom’s weight of good shall see it,  * And whoever 
has done an atom’s weight of evil, shall see it.(99:7-8) 

which indicates the fullest manifestation of the name of Preserver. If you want proof 
of  this  truth  of  the All-Wise  Qur’an,  look at  the  pages  of  the  book  of the  universe, 
which  is  written  on  the  pattern  of  the  Clear  Book;  you  will  see  the  maximum 
manifestation of the divine name of Preserver and many things similar in many ways 
to the supreme truth of this verse.  

For instance, take a handful of seeds of various trees, flowers, and plants, which 
are like the small coffers and are themselves all different and various, then bury them 
in  the  darkness  of  simple  and  lifeless  earth.  Then  water  them  with  simple  water, 
which lacks balance, cannot distinguish things, and runs wherever you pour it. 

Now  come  back  in  the  spring,  the  arena  of  the  annual  resurrection,  and  look! 
Note carefully the time in the spring when the Israfil-like angel of thunder calls out to 
the  rain  as  though  sounding  his  trumpet,  giving the  good  news  of  the  breath of  life 
being breathed into the seeds buried beneath the ground;  you will  see that under the 
manifestation  of  the  divine  name  of  Preserver,  those  seeds  that resemble  each  other 
and are all mixed up and confused, conform perfectly and without error to the creative 
commands  proceeding  from  the  All-Wise  Creator.  They  conform  so  exactly  that  in 
their  growth  a  brilliant consciousness,  insight,  purpose,  will,  knowledge,  perfection, 
and wisdom are apparent. For you see that those seeds which all resemble each other 
separate out and are distinguished from one another. 

For example, this tiny seed has become a fig-tree, it has started to spread the All-
Wise Creator’s bounties over our heads. It distributes them, stretching them out to us 
with its hands. And these two seeds which are superficially the same have produced 
the  flowers  called  sun-flowers  and  pansies.  They  have  adorned  themselves  for  us. 
They smile in our faces, making us love them. And this sort of seed has produced fine 
fruits; they became shoots, then trees. Whetting our appetites with their delectable  

                                                 

23 The second and third matters of the Fifteenth Note are parts of the Twenty-Fourth Flash. The 

second is included in the Twenty-Fourth Flash, and the third in Barla Lahikası. 

 

188

tastes, scents, and forms, they invite us to themselves. They sacrifice themselves for 
their customers so that they may rise from the level of vegetable life to that of animal 
life.  And  so  on.  You  can  make  further  examples  in  the  same  way.  The  seeds 
developed  in  such  a  way  that  the  single  handful  became  a  garden  filled  with 
multifarious  trees  and  flowers.  There  was  no  fault,  no  error  among  them.  They 
demonstrated the meaning of the verse, 

So turn your vision again; do you see any flaw?(67:3) 

Through  the  manifestation  and  bestowal  of  the  name  of  Preserver,  each  of  the 
seeds preserves and shows without confusion or defect the  legacy  inherited from its 
parent and origins. 

This is a certain indication that the Preserver who carries out this wondrous work 
will demonstrate the supreme manifestation of His preservation at the resurrection of 
the dead and Last Judgement. 

Yes, the manifestation of preservation that is thus faultless and without defect in 
insignificant,  fleeting,  transient  states  is  a  decisive  proof  that  the  actions,  works, 
words,  and  good deeds  and bad deeds of  man,  the  holder of  the  Supreme Trust  and 
vicegerent of the earth – deeds which have an eternal effect and supreme importance 
– are precisely preserved and will be subject to account. 

Does man suppose he will be left to his own devices? God forbid! He is destined 
for eternity, and for everlasting happiness and perpetual misery. He will be called to 
account  for  all  his  actions,  small  and  great,  many  and  few.  He  will  receive  either 
reward or punishment. 

Witnesses to the maximum manifestation of preservation and to the truth of the 
first-mentioned verse are beyond count or calculation. Those we  have shown  in this 
Matter are a mere drop from the ocean, an atom from a mountain. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

 
*   *   * 

 

The Eighteenth Flash 

 
This  has  been  published  in  Sikke-i Tasdik-i Gaybî  (The  Ratifying  Stamp  of  the 

Unseen) and in hand-duplicated editions of Lem’alar (The Flashes Collection). 

 

 

*   *   *                                                                                                                       

 

 
 

 
 

 

189

The Nineteenth Flash 

On Frugality 

[This treatise is about frugality and contentment, and  
wastefulness and extravagance.] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Eat and drink, but waste not by excess.(7:31) 

This verse gives most important and wise instruction in the form of categorically 
commanding  frugality  and  clearly  prohibiting  wastefulness.  The  matter  contains 
seven points. 

FIRST POINT 

The  All-Compassionate  Creator  desires  THANKS in  return  for  the  bounties  He 
bestows on mankind, while wastefulness is contrary to thanks, and slights the bounty 
and causes loss. Frugality,  however, shows respect for the  bounty and is profitable. 
Yes,  frugality  is  both  a  sort  of thanks,  and  shows  respect  towards  the  divine  mercy 
manifested  in  the  bounties,  and  most  definitely  is  the  cause  of  plenty.  So  too,  like 
abstinence,  it  is  health-giving  for  the  body,  and  since  it  saves  a  person  from  the 
degradation  of  what  is  in  effect  begging,  is  a  cause  of  self-respect.  It  is  also  a 
powerful means of experiencing the pleasure to be found in bounties, and tasting that 
pleasure in bounties which apparently afford no pleasure. As for wastefulness, since it 
is opposed to these instances of wisdom, it has grave consequences. 

SECOND POINT 

The All-Wise Maker created the human body in the form of a wonderful palace 
and  resembling  a  well-ordered  city.  The  sense  of  taste  in  the  mouth  is  like  a  door-
keeper, and the nerves and blood vessels like telephone and telegraph wires; they are 
the means by which the sense of taste communi 

 

190

cates with the stomach, which is at the centre of the body, and informs it of the food 
that  enters  the  mouth.  If  the  body  and  stomach  have  no  use  for  it,  it  says: 
“Forbidden!”, and expels it. And sometimes the food is harmful and bitter as well as 
not being beneficial for the body, and it spits it out immediately. 

Thus,  since  the  sense  of  taste  is  a  doorkeeper,  from  the  point  of  view  of 
administering the body, the stomach is a master and a ruler. If the gifts arriving at the 
palace or city and those given to the palace’s ruler are worth one hundred liras, only 
five liras’ worth is appropriate for the doorkeeper in the form of a tip, lest he becomes 
conceited  and  is  corrupted,  then  forgetting  his  duty  he  lets  revolutionaries  into  the 
palace who will give him a bigger tip. 

In  consequence  of  this  mystery  we  shall  now  imagine  two  mouthfuls.  One 
consists of nutritious food like cheese and egg and costs forty para,1 and the other is 
of the  choicest pastries and costs ten  kurush. Before entering the mouth, there  is  no 
difference in these two mouthfuls with respect to the body, they are equal. And after 
passing  down  the  throat,  they  are  still  equal  in  nourishing  the  body.  Indeed,  forty 
paras’ worth of cheese is sometimes more nutritious. Only, in regard to pampering the 
sense of taste  in the mouth, there is a  half-minute difference. You can see  from this 
what a meaningless and harmful waste it is to increase the cost from forty para to ten 
kurush for the sake of half a minute. 

Now, although the gift arriving for the palace’s ruler is worth one lira, to give the 
doorkeeper a tip nine times bigger than his due will corrupt him. He will declare: “I 
am  the  ruler,”  and  will  allow  to  enter  whoever  gives  him  the  biggest  tip  and  most 
pleasure;  he  will  cause  a  revolution  and  conflagration  to  break  out.  Then  he  will 
compel them to cry out: “Oh! Call the doctor and get him to put out this  fire  in my 
stomach and bring down my temperature!” 

Thus, frugality and contentment are in conformity with divine wisdom; they treat 
the  sense  of  taste  as  a  doorkeeper  and  give  it  its  remuneration  accordingly.  As  for 
wastefulness, since it is to act contrarily to wisdom, it swiftly receives its punishment, 
upsets  the  stomach,  and  causes  real  appetite  to  be  lost.  Producing  from  the 
unnecessary  variety  of  foods  a  false  and  artificial appetite,  it  causes  indigestion  and 
illness. 

                                                 

1 There were forty para to a kurush, and a hundred kurush to a lira. (Tr.) 

 

191

THIRD POINT 

We said in the Second Point that the sense of taste is a doorkeeper, and indeed, 
for the heedless and those who have not progressed spiritually or advanced in the way 
of thanks, it is like a doorkeeper. Wastefulness should not be indulged in or the sense 
of taste’s price be raised from one to ten for the sake of giving it pleasure. 

However,  the  sense  of  taste  of  those  truly  on  the  way  of  thanks,  those  seeking 
reality,  and  those  who  approach  reality  with  their  hearts  is  like  a  supervisor  and 
inspector  in  the  kitchens  of  divine  mercy,  as  is  explained  in  the  comparison  in  the 
Sixth Word. Its duty is to recognize and weigh up the varieties of divine bounties on 
the tiny scales present in it to the number of foods, and to send the body and stomach 
news of the food in the form of thanks. In this respect the sense of taste does not only 
look to the physical stomach; since it looks also to the heart, spirit, and mind, it holds 
a  position  and  importance  superior  to  the  stomach.  It  can  follow  its  pleasure  on 
condition it is not wasteful or extravagant, and is purely to carry out its duty of thanks 
and recognize and perceive the varieties of divine bounty, and on condition it is licit 
and  does  not  lead  to  degradation  and  begging.  In  fact,  delicious  foods  may  be 
preferred  in  order  to  employ  the  tongue  which  bears  the  sense  of  taste  in  giving 
thanks.  The  following  is  an  instance  of  Shaykh  Geylani’s  wonder-working  which 
alludes to this truth: 

At  one  time,  being  instructed  by  Ghawth  al-A‘zam,  Shaykh  Geylani  (May  his 
mystery  be  sanctified),  was  the  only  son  of  an  aged  and  anxious  woman.  This 
esteemed  lady  had  gone  to  her  son’s  cell  and  seen  that  he  had  nothing  to  eat  but  a 
piece  of  dry,  black  bread.  Her  maternal  compassion  was  aroused  by  his  emaciated 
condition  resulting  from  his  asceticism.  She  felt  sorry  for  him.  Later  she  went  to 
Ghawth  al-A‘zam  in  order  to  complain,  and  saw  the  Shaykh  was  tucking  into  roast 
chicken.  Out  of  her  concern,  she  declared:  “O  Master!  My  son  is  dying  of  hunger 
while  you  are  eating  chicken!”  Whereupon  Ghawth  al-A‘zam  said  to  the  chicken: 
“Rise up, with God’s permission!” At this, the cooked chicken bones assembled and 
were  thrown  out  of  the  dish  as  an  entire  live  chicken.  This  has  been  related 
unanimously through many reliable and documented channels as a marvel of someone 
whose extraordinary wonder-working is world-famous. Ghawth al-A‘zam said to her: 
“When your son reaches this level, then he too can eat chicken.”2 Thus, the meaning 
of  Ghawth al-A‘zam’s  words is this:  whenever  your  son’s spirit  rules his  body,  and 
his heart rules the  

                                                 

2 See, Gilani, Ghunya al-Talibin, 502; Nabhani, Jami‘ Karamat al-Awliya’, ii, 203. 

 

192

desires  of  his  soul,  and  his  reason  rules  his  stomach,  and  he  wants  pleasure  for the 
sake of offering thanks, then he may eat delicious things. 

FOURTH POINT 

According  to  the  Hadith  the  meaning  of  which  is:  “The  thrifty  will  suffer  no 
family difficulties as regards livelihood,”3 the frugal and economical person will not 
suffer undue trouble and hardship in supporting his family. 

There  are  countless  proofs  that  frugality  yields  plenty  and  good  living.  For 
instance,  I  have  seen  myself  and  I  can  say  according  to the  testimony  of  those  who 
have befriended and assisted me that by being frugal I have sometimes seen a tenfold 
increase,  and  so  have  my  friends.  Even,  nine  years  ago  –  and  now  it  is  thirty,  a 
number of the tribal leaders who were exiled to Burdur together with me did their best 
to make me accept their zakat so that I would not suffer privation and humiliation due 
to  lack  of  money.  I  said  to  those  rich  leaders:  “I  have  very  little  money,  but  I  am 
frugal and economical and I am accustomed to being content with  little. I am richer 
than  you.”  I  refused  their  repeated  and  insistent  offers.  It  is  worth  noting  that  two 
years  later some of those who had offered me their zakat were in debt because they 
had not been frugal. Praise be to God, seven  years on from that, thanks to the plenty 
resulting from frugality that small amount of money was still sufficient for me; it did 
not  degrade  me,  nor  compel  me  to  present  my  needs  to  the  people,  nor  make  me 
deviate  from  my  way  of  self-sufficiency  and  being  independent  of  people,  which  is 
one of the principles of my life. 

The person who is not frugal is certain to be abased and reduced to poverty and in 
effect  to  begging.  At  the  present  time,  money,  the  means  of  wastefulness  and 
extravagance, is extremely expensive. Sometimes a person sells his honour and self-
respect and bribes are taken to obtain it. Sometimes the sacred things of religion are 
sold, then some inauspicious money received in return. That is to say, material goods 
worth ten kurush are procured in return for an immaterial loss of a hundred lira. 

However, according to the implied meaning of the verse, 

Indeed,  it  is  God  Who  gives  all  sustenance,  Lord  of  all  power  and 
strength,(51:58) 

and the explicit meaning of the verse, 

And there is no moving creature on the earth but its sustenance is provided 
by God,(11:6) 

                                                 

vi, 49, 56, 57. 

3 Musnad, i, 447; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, v, 454, no: 7939; al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, iii, 36; 

 

193

if  a  person  is  frugal  and  restricts  his  needs  to  the  essential,  he  will  find  enough 
sustenance to live on in unexpected ways. The verse guarantees it. Yes, there are two 
sorts of sustenance:4 

One is true sustenance, which is enough to subsist on. As the verse decrees, this 
is  guaranteed  by  the  Sustainer.  So  long  as  man’s  inclination  towards  evil  does  not 
interfere,  he  will  find  this  essential  sustenance  under  any  circumstances.  He will  be 
compelled to sacrifice neither his religion, nor his honour, nor his self-respect. 

The  second  sort  is  metaphorical  sustenance,  due  to  which  and  its  abuse, 
inessential needs become like essential ones, and owing to the calamity of custom and 
tradition, people become addicted to them and cannot give them up. Such sustenance 
is  not  guaranteed  by  the  Sustainer,  so  the  obtaining  of  it  is  extremely  expensive  – 
especially  at  the  present  time.  These  unfruitful,  inauspicious  goods  are  obtained  by 
first  of  all  sacrificing  one’s  self-respect  and  accepting  degradation,  and  sometimes 
stooping  to  what  is  in  effect  begging,  kissing  the  feet  of  the  vile,  and  sometimes 
sacrificing the sacred things of religion, which are the light of eternal life. 

Also,  at this  time  of  poverty  and  hardship,  the  distress  people  with  consciences 
feel  at  the  anguish  of  the  hungry  and  needy  sours  any  pleasure  to  be  had  from 
unlawfully acquired money. As far as doubtful goods are concerned, one has to make 
do  with  them  to  the  minimum  degree  necessary  during  strange  times  such  as  these. 
For  according  to  the  rule,  “Necessity  is  determined  according  to  its  extent,”  if 
compelled,  illicit  goods  may  be  taken  to  the  minimum  degree  necessary,  not  more. 
Someone in dire need may eat prohibited meat, but he may not eat his fill. He may eat 
enough  only  to  remain  alive.  Also,  one  could  not  fully  enjoy  more  than  this  in  the 
presence of a hundred people who are hungry. 

The  following  is  a  story  showing  that  frugality  is  the  cause  of  dignity  and 

distinction: 

One time, Khatim Tay,  who was world-famous for his  generosity, was  giving a 
large banquet. Having given his guests a superfluity of presents, he went out to walk 
in the desert. There he saw a poor old man carrying a load of thorny bushes and plants 
on his back. The thorns were piercing his skin and making him bleed. Khatim said to 
him: “Khatim Tay is giving a large banquet and giving away gifts. Go there and you 
will  be  given  five  hundred  kurush  in  return  for    your  load  worth  five  kurush.”  The 
frugal old man replied: “I raise and carry this thorny load with my self-respect; I am 
not going to become obliged to Khatim Tay.” Later, they asked Khatim  

                                                 

4 See, al-Jurjani, Tarikh Jurjan, 366; al-Ghazali, al-Maqsad al-Asna, 85-6. 

 

194

Tay: “Have you come across anyone more generous and estimable than yourself?” He 
replied:  “The  frugal  old  man  I  met  in  the  desert  was  more  estimable,  elevated,  and 
generous than me.”5 

FIFTH POINT 

Out of  His perfect  generosity, Almighty  God makes a poor man understand the 
pleasure  of  His  bounty  the  same  as  a  rich  man,  and  a  beggar  the  same  as  a  king. 
Indeed, the pleasure a poor man obtains  from a dry piece of black bread because of 
hunger and being frugal is greater than the pleasure a king or a rich man obtains from 
the choicest pastries consumed with the weariness and lack of appetite resulting from 
excess. 

It  is  surprising  but  some  dissolute,  extravagant  people  accuse  the  frugal  and 
economical of being mean and stingy. God forbid! Frugality is dignity and generosity. 
Stinginess  and  meanness  are  the  inner  face  of  the  apparently  noble  qualities  of  the 
wasteful and extravagant. There is an event corroborating this which occurred in my 
room in Isparta the year this treatise was written. It was as follows: 

One of my students insisted on my accepting – contrary to my rule and life-long 
principle  –  a  present  of  nearly  two  and  a  half  okkas6  of  honey.  However  much  I 
reiterated my rule, he was not to be persuaded. So I told the three brothers who were 
with me to take it, saying that by being economical they would eat the honey for thirty 
to forty days in the months of Sha‘ban and Ramadan, and not lack something sweet to 
eat, and the one who brought it would earn the reward. I myself had an okka of honey 
as well. Although my three friends were moderate and appreciated frugality, because 
they  offered  the  honey  to  each  other,  and  flattered  each  others’  souls,  and  each 
preferred  the  others  to  himself,  which  in  one  respect  is  a  good  quality,  they  forgot 
about  being  economical.  They  finished  the  two  and  a  half  okkas  of  honey  in  three 
nights. Laughing, I said: “I would have given you the taste of that honey for thirty to 
forty  days,  but  you  have  reduced  the  thirty  days  to  three.  I  hope  you enjoyed  it!”  I 
consumed  my  one  okka  of  honey  frugally.  For  the  whole  of  Sha’ban  and  Ramadan 
both I ate it, and, Praise be to God, every evening while breaking the fast I gave each 
of those brothers a spoonful,7 and it became the means of signficant reward. Perhaps 
anyone who saw my doing this thought it was stinginess and what my brothers did for 
three nights was generosity. But in point of  

                                                 

5 See, Bukhari, Musaqat, 13; Zakat, 50; Buyu’, 15; Ibn Maja, Zakat, 25; Musnad, i, 167. 
6 One okka equalled 2.8 lbs. (Tr.) 
7 That is, a fairly large teaspoon. 

 

195

fact I perceived that concealed beneath the apparent stinginess lay an elevated dignity, 
increase and plenty, and great reward. If they  had not stopped, it would have  led to 
something  much  worse  than  stinginess  beneath  the  generosity  and  excess,  like 
beggarliness and watching another’s hand greedily and expectantly. 

SIXTH POINT 

There is a great difference between frugality and stinginess. Just as humility is a 
praiseworthy  quality  superficially  resembling  but  different  to  the  bad  quality  of 
servility, and dignity is a laudable virtue superficially similar to but different from the 
bad quality of haughtiness, so too frugality, which was one of the Prophet’s (UWBP) 
elevated qualities and indeed is one of the things on which the divine wisdom in the 
order of the universe depends,8 bears no relation to stinginess, which is a mixture of 
baseness, avarice, miserliness, and greed. There is merely a superficial resemblance. 
The following is an event corroborating this fact: 

‘Abdullah  ibn  ‘Umar,  who  was  one  of  the  famous  Companions  of  the  Prophet 
known  as  the  seven  ‘Abdullahs,9  was  the  greatest  and  most  important  of the  Caliph 
‘Umar, Faruq al-A‘zam’s sons, and one of the most distinguished and learned of the 
Companions. One day while shopping in the market, in order to be economical and to 
preserve  the  confidence  and  integrity  on  which  trade  depends,10  he  disputed  hotly 
over something worth a few kurush. One of the Companions saw him, and imagining 
the Illustrious Successor of the Prophet on Earth, the Caliph ‘Umar’s son’s wrangling 
over  a  few  kurush  to  be  an  extraordinary  stinginess,  he  followed  him  in  order  to 
understand  his  conduct.  Next he  saw  that  ‘Abdullah  was  entering  his  blessed  house 
and had spotted a poor man at the door. He chatted with him for a bit, and the man 
left. Then he came out of the second door of the house and saw another poor man. He 
chatted  with  him  for  a  while  too,  and  the  man  left.  The  Companion,  who  was 
watching  from  the  distance,  was  curious.  He  went  and  asked  the  poor  men: 
“‘Abdullah  paused  a  while  with  you.  What  did  he  do?”  Each  of  them  replied:  “He 
gave me a gold piece.” “Glory be to God!,” exclaimed the Companion, and thought to 
himself: “How is  it that  he wrangled like that over a few kurush in the market, then 
was completely happy to give away two hundred kurush in his house without letting 
anyone know?” 

                                                 

8 Abu Da’ud, Adab, 2; Musnad, i, 296. 
9 The seven ‘Abdullah’s (al-’Abadila al-Sab’a): ‘Abdullah b. ‘Abbas, ‘Abdullah b. ‘Umar, 
‘Abdullah b. Mas’ud, ‘Abdullah b. Rawaha, ‘Abdullah b. Salam, ‘Abdullah b. ‘Amr b. al-’As, 
‘Abdullah b. Abi Awfa (R. A.). (Tr.) 

10 See, Tirmidhi, Buyu’, 3; Ibn Maja, Tijarat, 1; Darimi, Buyu’, 98. 

 

196

He went to ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar and said: “O Imam! Solve this difficulty for me! 
In  the  market  you  did  that,  while  in  your  house  you  did  this.”  ‘Abdullah  replied  to 
him saying: “What I did in the market was not stinginess, but arose from frugality; it 
was perfectly reasonable, and to preserve confidence and honesty, which are the basis 
and  spirit  of  commerce.  And  what  I  did  by  my  house  arose  from  the  heart’s 
compassion and the spirit’s perfection. Neither was the first stinginess, nor the second 
immoderateness.” 

Alluding to this, Imam Abu Hanifa said: “There can be no excess in good, just as 
there  is  no good in excess.”11 That is to say,  just as in good works and benevolence 
there can no excess or wastefulness – on condition they are for the deserving, so there 
is no good at all in wastefulness and immoderateness. 

SEVENTH POINT 

Excess and wastefulness lead to greed, and greed has three consequences: 
The First is dissatisfaction, and as for dissatisfaction, it destroys endeavour and 
enthusiasm for work, and causes the dissatisfied person to complain instead of giving 
thanks, and makes  him lazy. Such a person abandons possessions which though few 
in  number  are  licit,12  and  seeks  possessions  which  are  illicit  and  trouble-free.  He 
sacrifices his self-respect on the way, and even his honour. 

The  Second  Consequence  of  Greed  is  disappointment  and  loss.  The  greedy 
person  drives  away  what  he  wishes  for,  is  found  disagreeable,  and  is  deprived  of 
assistance and help. He even confirms the saying: “The greedy person is unsuccessful 
and suffers loss.”13 

Greed  and  contentment  have  their  effects  in  the  animal  kingdom  in  accordance 
with  an  extensive  law.  For  instance,  the  natural  contentment  of  trees  needy  for 
sustenance  makes  their  sustenance  hasten  to  them;  this  shows  the  huge  benefits  of 
contentment.  While  animals’  running  after  their  sustenance  greedily  and  with 
difficulty and deficiency demonstrates the great loss of greed. 

                                                 

Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, v, 454. 

11 See, al-Ghazali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, i, 262; Qurtubi, al-Jami‘ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, vii, 110; al-

12 Consumers increase and producers decrease as a result of wastefulness and lack of economy. 

Everyone fixes his eye on the government’s door, and industry, trade, and agriculture, on which social 
life depend, decrease. And the nation declines and is impoverished. 

13 See, Ibn Qays, Qura al-Dayf, iv, 301; al-Maydani, Majma‘ al-Amthal, i, 214 

 

197

Also,  the  contentment  apparent  through  their  tongues  of  disposition  of  the 
helpless young and a pleasant food like milk flowing out to them from an unexpected 
place,  while  wild  animals  greedily  attack  their  deficient  and  dirty  sustenance,  prove 
our claim in clear fashion. 

Also,  the  contented  attitude  of  fat  fish  being  the  means  of  their  perfect 
sustenance, and intelligent animals like foxes and monkeys remaining puny and weak 
because  they  cannot  find  sufficient  sustenance  although  they  pursue  it  with  greed, 
again  show  the  degree  to  which  greed  is  the cause  of  hardship  and  contentment  the 
cause of ease.  

Also,  certain  people  finding  through  greed,  usury,  and  trickery  their  degrading, 
miserable,  illicit  sustanance  only  at  subsistence  level,  and  the  contented  attitude  of 
nomads  and  their  living  with  dignity  and  finding  sufficient  sustenance,  proves 
decisively what we say once more. 

Also, many scholars14 and literary figures15 being reduced to poverty because of 
the  greed  arising  from  their  intelligence,  and  many  stupid  and  incapable  people 
becoming  rich  due  to  their  innate  contentedness16  proves  decisively  that  licit 
sustenance comes  because of  impotence  and  want,  not by  virtue of  ability  and  will. 
Indeed,  licit  sustenance  is  in  inverse  proportion  to  ability  and  will.  For  the  more 
children increase in ability and will, the more their sustenance decreases, the further it 
is from them and the more difficult to digest. According to the Hadith, “Contentment 
is an unfailing treasure,”17 contentment  is a treasury of  good living and ease of life, 
while greed is a mine of loss and abasement. 

The  Third  Consequence:  Greed  destroys  sincerity  and  damages  actions  in 
regard to the hereafter. For if a God-fearing person suffers from greed, he will desire 
the regard of others, and someone who considers the  

                                                 

14 It was asked of Bozorgmehr, the Wazir of the Persian Shah Nushirvan the Just and scholar 
famous for his intelligence, “Why are the learned to be seen at the doors of rulers and rulers not to be 
seen at the doors of the learned, whereas learning is superior to rulership?” He replied: “Because of the 
knowledge of the learned and the ignorance of the rulers.” That is to say, due to their ignorance, rulers 
do not know the value of learning so that they approach the doors of the learned to seek it. But because 
of their knowledge, the learned know the value of their rulers’ goods and possessions and seek them at 
the rulers’ doors. Explaining thus wittily the greed resulting from the cleverness of the learned, which 
causes some of them to be impecunious and in want, Bozorgmehr replied in a refined manner.                                                            

                                                                                     Signed:     Hüsrev 
 
15 An event corroborating this: in France, a beggar’s licence was given to literary figures because 

they were so proficient at begging.                   

                                                                                     Signed:    Süleyman Rüştü 
 
16 See, al-Daylami, al-Musnad, iv, 385. 
17 See, Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Awsat, vii, 84; Bayhaqi, al-Zuhd, ii, 88; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-

Khafa’, ii, 133. 

 

198

attention  of  others  cannot  have  complete  sincerity.  This  consequence  is  extremely 
important and worth noticing. 

I n  S h o r t : Excess and wastefulness lead to lack of contentment. And lack of 
contentment  destroys  enthusiasm  for  work;  it  causes  laziness,  opens  the  door  to 
complaining  about  life,  and  makes  the  dissatisfied  person  grumble  continuously.18 
Also,  it  destroys  sincerity,  and  opens  the  door  to  hypocrisy.  And  it  destroys  self-
respect, and points the way to begging. 

As  for  frugality  and  economy,  these  result  in  contentment.  According  to  the 
Hadith,  “The  contented  person  is  respected,  and  the  greedy  person  despised,”19 
contentment gives rise to self-esteem. It also encourages effort and work. It increases 
enthusiasm, and induces striving. For example, a person worked for one day. Because 
he was content with the petty wage he received in the evening, he worked again the 
second day. But because the wasteful and immoderate person was not content, he did 
not work the following day, or if he did, he did so without enthusiasm. 

Also, the contentment arising from frugality opens the door of thanks and closes 
the door of complaint. Throughout his life, the contented person is thankful. And in so 
far  as  he  is  independent  of  others  due  to  his  contentment,  he  does  not  seek  their 
regard. The door of sincerity is opened and the door of hypocrisy closed. 

I observed the fearsome harm of wastefulness and excess on a broad scale. It was 
as follows: nine years ago I visited a fortunate town. It was winter and I could not see 
its sources of wealth. Several times the town’s Mufti, may God have mercy on him, 
said to me, “Our people are poor.” His words touched me. The next five or six years I 
felt continual pity for the people of the town. Eight years later I again visited it, in the 
summer. I looked at the gardens and recalled the words of the late Mufti. “Glory be to 
God!”, I exclaimed, “These gardens’ crops are far greater than the needs of the town. 
Its  people  should  be  very  rich.”  I  was  amazed.  Then  remembering  a  truth  that  has 
never  deceived  me  and  is  my  guide  in  understanding  other truths,  I  understood  that 
the  abundance  and  plenty  had  disappeared  due  to  wastefulness  and  excess,  so  that 
although the town possessed such sources of wealth, the late Mufti used to say: “Our 
people are poor.”  

Indeed,  just  as  giving  zakat  and  being  frugal  and  economical  is  proven  by 

experience to be the cause of increase and plenty in goods and  

                                                 

18 Whenever you meet a wasteful, immoderate person, you hear complaints. No matter how rich 
he is, his tongue still complains. But when you meet even the poorest, but contented, person, you hear 
only thanks. 

19 See, Ibn al-Athir, al-Nihaya fi Ghara’ib al-Hadith, iv, 114; al-Zabidi, Taj al-‘Arus, xxii, 90. 

 

199

possessions,20  so  too  innumerable  events  show  that  wastefulness  and  the  failure  to 
give zakat cause increase and plenty to be taken away. 

The Plato of Islamic sages, the shaykh of physicians, and master of philosophers, 

the famous genius Abu ‘Ali Ibn Sina explained the verse, 

Eat and drink, but waste not in excess(7:31) 

just  from  the  point  of  view  of  medicine,  as  follows:  “I  concentrate  the  science  of 
medicine in two lines, the best word is the shortest; when you eat, eat little, and do not 
eat again for four or five hours. Health lies in digestion. That is to say, eat so much as 
you  can  digest  easily.  The  heaviest  and  most  tiring  thing  for  your  stomach  and 
yourself is to eat many things one on top of the other.”21 

An  Extraordinary  and  Instructive  ‘Coincidence’:22  In  all  the 
copies  of  the  Treatise  on Frugality  written  by  five  or  six  scribes  – 
three of whom were inexperienced, who were in different places far 
from one another, were writing  it out from different  copies, whose 
handwriting was all different, and who did not take the Alifs23 into 
consideration at all, the Alifs which ‘coincided’ numbered fifty-one, 
or with a prayer, fifty-three. These numbers coinciding with the date 
the Treatise on Frugality was written and copied, which was [13]51 
according  to  the  Rumi  calendar  and  [13]53  according  to  the  Hijri 
calendar, undoubtedly cannot be chance. It is an indication that the 
blessing of plenty resulting from frugality has risen to the degree of 
wondrousness, and that this year is fit to be named Frugality Year. 

the  Second  World  War,  by 

Indeed,  this  wonder  of  frugality  was  proved  two  years  later, 
during 
the  widespread  hunger, 
destruction, and waste, and mankind and everyone being compelled 
to be frugal. 

 
 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

                                                 

20 See, al-Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, x, 128: Idem., al-Mu‘jam al-Awsat, ii, 161, 274; al-

Bayhaqi, al-Sunan al-Kubra, iii, 382; iv, 84. 

21 That is to say, the most harmful thing for the body is to eat without having had a break of four 
to five hours, or to fill the stomach with a variety of foods one on top of the other just for the pleasure 
of it. 

22 ‘Coincidence’ (T. tevâfuk; Ar. tawafuq): the correspondence of letters or words in lines or 

patterns on one or several pages. (Tr.) 

 

200

The Twentieth Flash 

 

On Sincerity 

 
 

 

[While  being  the  first  of  the  five  Points  which  form  the 
Second of the seven Matters of the Seventeenth Flash, this 
became the Twentieth Flash because of its importance.] 

In the Name of God,  the Merciful, the Compassionate. 

The verse: 

Verily  We sent the Book down to you in truth, so worship God in sincerity, 
for God’s is sincerely practised religion,(39:2) 

and the noble saying of the Prophet (UWBP): 

“All men will perish, except the scholars, and all scholars will perish except 
those  who  act  in  accordance  with  their  knowledge,  and  all  of  them  will 
perish except the sincere, and even the sincere are in great danger,”1 

demonstrate together how important a principle of Islam is sincerity. From among the 
innumerable points concerning sincerity, we will briefly expound only five. 

Note:  An  auspicious  sign  of  blessed  Isparta  which  causes  one  to 
offer  thanks  is that  compared  with  other  places,  there  is  no  visible 
rivalry  and  dispute  between  the  pious,  those  who  follow  the  Sufi 
path,  and  the  religious  scholars.  Even  if  the  required true  love  and 
union  is  not  present,  comparatively  speaking,  there  is  no  harmful 
rivalry and conflict. 

                                                 

1 See, al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 415; al-Ghazali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, iii, 414. 

 

201

First Point 

 
An  Important and  Awesome  Question:  Why  is  it  that  while  the  worldly  and the 
neglectful,  and  even  the  misguided  and  hypocrites,  co-operate  without  rivalry,  the 
people of religion, the religious scholars, and those who follow the Sufi path, oppose 
each other in rivalry, although they are the people of truth and concord? Agreement 
belongs in reality to the people of concord and dispute to the hypocrites; how is it that 
these two have changed places? 

T h e  A n s w e r :  We will set forth seven of the extremely numerous causes of 

this painful, disgraceful and awesome situation, one that causes the zealous to weep. 

THE FIRST 

Just as dispute among the people of the truth does not arise from lack of the truth, 
so too the agreement prevailing among the people of neglect does not arise from any 
possession of truth. Rather  it  is that a specific duty and particular function has been 
assigned  to  the  classes  in  society,  like ‘the  worldly,’2  those  engaged  in  politics,  and 
those  who  have  received  a  secular  education,  and  thus  the  functions  of  the  various 
groups, societies, and communities have been defined and become distinguished from 
one another. Similarly, the material reward they  are to receive for their  functions  in 
order  to  maintain  a  livelihood,  as  well  as  the  moral  reward  that  consists  in  the 
attention they receive from men for the sake of their ambition and pride – this too is 
established and specified.3 There  is therefore nothing  held  in common to the degree 
that  it  might  produce  conflict, dissension  and  rivalry.  However  evil  be  the  path  that 
they tread, they will be able to preserve unity and agreement.  

But as for the people of religion, the scholars, and those who follow the path, the 

duty of each is concerned with all men; their material reward is  

                                                 

2 ‘The worldly’ (ehl-i dünya): those people whose view is restricted to the life of this world and 

who disregard the hereafter, or those who sell religion for this world. (Tr.) 

3 Be aware that the attention of men cannot be demanded, but only given. If it is given, one should 

not delight in it. If one delights in it, sincerity is lost and hypocrisy takes its place. The attention of 
men, if accompanied by the desire for honour and fame, is not a reward and a prize, but a reproach and 
chastisement for lack of sincerity. Such attention of men, such honour and fame, harm sincerity, the 
source of vitality for all good deeds, and even though they yield a slight pleasure as far as the gate of 
the tomb, on the other side of that gate they take on the form of torment. One should not therefore 
desire the attention of men, but flee and shy away from it. Be warned, all you who worship fame and 
run after honour and rank! 

 

202

not  set  and  specified;  and  their  share  in  social  esteem  and  acceptance  and  public 
attention is not predetermined. Many may be candidates for the same position; many 
hands may stretch out for each moral and material reward that is offered. Hence it is 
that  conflict  and  rivalry  arise;  concord  is  changed  into  discord,  and  agreement  into 
dispute. 

Now the cure and remedy for this appalling disease is sincerity. Sincerity may be 
attained  by  preferring  the  worship  of  God  to  the  worship  of  one’s  own  soul,  by 
causing  God’s  pleasure  to  vanquish  the  pleasure  of  the  soul  and  the  ego,  and  thus 
manifesting the meaning of the verse: 

Verily my reward is from God alone;(11:29) 

by  renouncing  the  material  and  moral  reward  to  be  had  from  men4  and  thus 
manifesting the meaning of the verse: 

Naught is incumbent on the Messenger but conveying the message;(5:99) 

and  by  knowing  that  such  matters  as  goodly  acceptance,  and  making  a  favourable 
impression,  and  gaining  the  attention  of  men  are  God’s  concern  and  a  favour  from 
Him, and that they play no part in conveying the message, which is one’s own duty, 
nor are they necessary for it, nor is one charged with gaining them – by knowing this 
a person will be successful in gaining sincerity, otherwise it will vanish. 

SECOND CAUSE 

The  agreement  among  the  poeple  of  misguidance  is  on  account  of  their 
abasement,  and  the  dispute  among  the  people  of  guidance  is  on  account  of  their 
dignity.  That  is  to  say  that  the  people  of  neglect  –  those  misguided  ones  sunk  in 
worldly concerns – are weak and abased because they do not rely on truth and reality. 
On account of their abasement, they  need to augment their  strength, and because of 
this  need  they  wholeheartedly  embrace  the  aid  and  co-operation  of  others.  Even 
though the path they follow is  

                                                 

4 One should also take as one’s guide the quality of preferring others to oneself, the same quality 
of the Companions that is praised in the Qur’an. For example, when giving a present or performing an 
act of charity, one should always prefer the recipient to oneself, and without demanding or inwardly 
desiring any material reward for religious service, know one’s act to be purely God’s grace and not 
impose a sense of obligation on men. Nothing worldly should be sought in return for religious service, 
for otherwise sincerity will be lost. Men have many rights and claims, and may even deserve zakat. But 
it cannot be demanded. When one receives something, it cannot be said: “This is the reward for my 
service.” Rather in perfect contentment one should always prefer to oneself others who are more 
deserving. Thus manifesting the meaning of “They prefer others to themselves, though poverty be their 
lot” (Qur’an, 59:9), one may be saved from this terrible danger and gain sincerity. 

 

203

misguidance,  they  preserve  their  agreement.  It  is  as  if  they  were  making  their 
godlessness  into  a  form  of  worship  of  the  truth,  their  misguidance  into  a  form  of 
sincerity,  their  irreligion  into  a  form of  solidarity,  and  their  hypocrisy  into  concord, 
and thus attaining success. For genuine sincerity, even for the sake of evil, cannot fail 
to yield results, and whatever man seeks with sincerity, God will grant him it.5 

But  as  for  the  people  of  guidance  and  religion,  the  religious  scholars  and  those 
who follow the Sufi path, since they rely upon truth and reality, and each of them on 
the  road  of  truth  thinks  only  of  his  Sustainer  and  trusts  in  His  succour,  they  derive 
dignity  from  their  belief.  When  they  feel  weakness,  they  turn  not  toward  men,  but 
toward God and seek help from Him. On account of difference  in outlook, they  feel 
no real need for the aid of the one whose outlook apparently opposes their own, and 
see no need for agreement and unity. Indeed, if obstinacy and egoism are present, one 
will  imagine  himself to be right and the other to be wrong; discord and rivalry take 
the  place  of  concord  and  love.  Thus  sincerity  is  chased  away  and  its  function 
disrupted. 

Now the only remedy for the critical consequences of this awesome state consists 

of nine commands: 

1. To act positively, that  is, out of love for one’s own outlook, avoiding enmity 
for other outlooks, not criticizing them, interfering in their beliefs and sciences, or in 
any way concerning oneself with them. 

2.  To  unite  within  the  fold  of  Islam,  irrespective  of  particular  outlook, 

remembering those numerous ties of unity that evoke love, brotherhood and concord. 
3. To adopt the just rule of conduct that the follower of any right outlook has the 
right to say, “My outlook is true, or the best,” but not that “My outlook alone is true,” 
or  that  “My  outlook  alone  is  good,”  thus  implying  the  falsity  or  repugnance  of  all 
other outlooks. 

4. To consider that union with the people of truth is a cause of divine succour and 

the high dignity of religion. 

5.  To  realize  that  the  individual  resistance  of  the  most  powerful person  against 
the  attacks  through  its  genius  of  the  mighty  collective  force  of  the  people  of 
misguidance  and  falsehood,  which  arises  from  their  solidarity,  will  inevitably  be 
defeated, and through the union of the people of truth, to create a joint and collective 
force also, in order to preserve justice and right in the face of that fearsome collective 
force of misguidance. 

                                                 

includes the matter under discussion. 

5 Yes, “Whoever seeks earnestly shall find” is a rule of truth. Its scope is comprehensive and 

 

204

6. In order to preserve truth from the assaults of falsehood, 
7. To abandon the self and its egoism, 
8. And give up the mistaken concept of self-pride, 
9. And cease from all insignificant feelings aroused by rivalry. 
If  this  ninefold  rule  is  adhered  to,  sincerity  will  be  preserved  and  its  function 

perfectly performed.6 

THIRD CAUSE 

Disagreement  among  the  people  of  truth  does  not  arise  from  lack  of  zeal  and 
aspiration,  nor  does  union  among  the  people  of  misguidance  arise  from  loftiness  of 
aspiration.  That  which  impels  the  people  of  guidance  to  the  misuse  of  their  high 
aspiration and hence to disagreement and rivalry is the desire for heavenly reward that 
is counted as a praiseworthy quality in respect of the hereafter, and extreme eagerness 
with  respect  to duties  pertaining  to  the  hereafter.  Thinking  to  oneself,  “Let  me  gain 
this reward, let me guide these people, let them listen to me,” he takes up a position of 
rivalry  towards  the  true  brother  who  faces  him  and  who  stands  in  real  need  of  his 
love, assistance, brotherhood and aid. Saying to oneself, “Why are my pupils going to 
him? Why don’t I have as many pupils as  him?” he falls prey to egoism, inclines to 
the chronic disease of ambition, loses all sincerity, and opens the door to hypocrisy. 

The  cure  for  this  error,  this  wound,  this  awesome  sickness  of  the  spirit,  is  the 
principle that “God’s pleasure is won by sincerity alone,” and not by a large following 
or  great  success.  For  these  latter  are  a  function  of  God’s  will;  they  cannot  be 
demanded, although they are sometimes given. Sometimes a single word will result in 
someone’s salvation and hence the pleasure of God. Quantity should not receive too 
much  attention,  for  sometimes  to guide  one  man  to  the  truth  may  be  as  pleasing  to 
God as guiding a thousand. Moreover sincerity and adherence to the truth require that 
one should desire the Muslims to benefit from anyone and at any place they can. To 
think “Let them take lessons from me so that I gain the reward” is a trick of the soul 
and the ego. 

O man greedy for reward in the hereafter and the performance of deeds  

                                                 

6 It is even recorded in authentic traditions  of the Prophet that at the end of time  the truly pious 

among the Christians will unite with the People of the Qur’an and fight their common enemy, 
irreligion. And at this time, too, the people of religion and truth need to unite sincerely not only with 
their own brothers and fellow believers, but also with the truly pious and spiritual ones among the 
Christians, temporarily refraining from the discussion and debate of points of difference in order to 
combat their joint enemy – aggressive atheism. 

 

205

entitling you to that reward! There have been certain prophets who had only a limited 
following but received the infinite reward of the sacred duty of prophethood. The true 
achievement lies, then, not in gaining a vast following, but in gaining God’s pleasure. 
What  do  you  imagine  yourself  to  be,  that  saying,  “Let  everyone  listen  to  me,”  you 
forget  your  function,  and  interfere  in  what  is  strictly  God’s  concern?  To  gain 
acceptance for you and to have people gather round you is God’s concern. So look to 
your own duty and concern, and do not meddle with God’s concerns. 

Moreover, it is not only men who earn reward for those who hear and speak the 
truth. The sentient and spiritual beings of God and His angels have filled the universe 
and  adorned  its  every  part.  If  you  want  plentiful  reward,  take  sincerity  as  your 
foundation and think only of God’s pleasure. Then every syllable of the blessed words 
that issue forth from your mouth will be brought to life by your sincerity and truthful 
intention,  and  going  to  the  ears  of  innumerable  sentient  beings,  they  will  illumine 
them and earn you reward. For when, for example, you say, “Praise and thanks be to 
God,” millions of these words, great and small, are written on the page of the air by 
God’s  leave.  Since  the  All-Wise  Inscriber  did  nothing  prodigally  or  in  vain,  He 
created  innumerable  ears,  as  many  as  were  needed  to  hear  those  multiple  blessed 
words. If those words are brought to life in the air by sincerity and truthful intent, they 
will enter the ears of the spirit beings like some tasty fruit in the mouth. But if God’s 
pleasure  and  sincerity  do  not  bring  those  words  to  life,  they  will  not  be  heard,  and 
reward  will  be  had  only  for  the  single  utterance  made  by  the  mouth.  Pay  good 
attention  to  this,  you  Qur’an  reciters  who  are  sad  that  your  voices  are  not  more 
beautiful and that more people do not listen to you! 

FOURTH CAUSE 

In just the same way that rivalry and disagreement among the people of guidance 
do  not  arise  from  failure  to  foresee  consequences  or  from  shortsightedness,  so  too 
wholehearted  agreement  among  the  people  of  misguidance  does  not  result  from 
farsightedness  or  loftiness  of  vision.  Rather  the  people  of  guidance,  through  the 
influence of truth and reality, do not succumb to the blind emotions of the soul, and 
follow  instead  the  farsighted  inclinations  of  the  heart  and  the  intellect.  Since, 
however,  they  fail  to  preserve  their  sense  of  direction  and  their  sincerity,  they  are 
unable to maintain their high station and fall into dispute.  

As for the people of misguidance, under the influence of the soul and caprice, and 
the  dominance  of  sense-perception,  which  is  blind  to  all  consequences  and  always 
prefers an ounce of immediate pleasure to a ton of  

 

206

future  pleasure,  they  come  together  in  eager  concord  for  the  sake  of  instant  benefit 
and immediate pleasure. Indeed, lowly and heartless worshippers of the ego are bound 
to congregate around worldly and immediate pleasures and benefits. It is true that the 
people  of  guidance  have  set  their  faces  to  the  rewards  of  the  hereafter  and  its 
perfections, in accordance with the lofty instructions of the heart and the intellect, but 
even  though  a  proper  sense  of  direction,  a  complete  sincerity  and  self-sacrificing 
union and concord are possible, because they have failed to rid themselves of egoism, 
and  on  account  of  deficiency  and  excess,  they  lose  their  union,  that  lofty  source  of 
power, and permit their sincerity to be shattered. Their duty in regard to the hereafter 
is also harmed. God’s pleasure is not had easily. 

The cure and remedy for this serious disease is to be proud of the company of all 
those travelling the path of truth, in accordance  with the principle of  love for God’s 
sake; to follow them and defer leadership to them; and to consider whoever is walking 
on  God’s  path  to  be  probably  better  than  oneself,  thereby  breaking  the  ego  and 
regaining sincerity. Salvation is also to be had from that disease by knowing that an 
ounce  of  deeds  performed  in  sincerity  is  preferable  to  a  ton  performed  without 
sincerity,  and  by  preferring  the  status  of  a  follower  to  that  of  a  leader,  with  all  the 
danger and responsibility that it involves. Thus sincerity is to be had, and one’s duties 
of preparation for the hereafter may be correctly performed. 

FIFTH CAUSE 

Dispute  and  disagreement  among  the  people  of  guidance  are  not  the  result  of 
weakness,  and  the  powerful  union  of  the  people  of  misguidance  is  not  the  result  of 
strength.  Rather  the  lack  of  union  of  the  people  of  guidance  comes  from  the  power 
that results from the support provided by perfect belief, and the union of the people of 
neglect and misguidance comes from the weakness and impotence they experience as 
a result of their lack of any inward support. The weak form powerful unions precisely 
because  of  their  need  for  union.7  Since  the  strong  do  not  feel  a  similar  need,  their 
unions are weak. Lions do not need union like foxes and therefore live as individuals, 
whereas wild goats form a herd to protect themselves against wolves. The community 
and  collective  personality  of  the  weak  is  strong,  and  the  community  and  collective 
personality of the strong is weak. There  

                                                 

7 Among the most powerful and effective organizations in the West is the American Organization 

for Women’s Rights and Liberty, even though women are called the fair sex, and are weak and 
delicate. Similarly, the organization of the Armenians, despite their weakness and small numbers when 
compared to other peoples, with its strong, self-sacrificing behaviour, provides another proof of our 
observation. 

 

207

is  a  subtle  allusion  to  this  in  the  Qur’an  in  the  words,  “And  women  in  the  city 
said,”(12:30)  the  verb  “said”  being  in  the  masculine  form,  although  it  should  be 
feminine  for  two  reasons  [women  is  a  feminine  noun,  and  also  a  plural  –  so-called 
“broken” plurals in Arabic are always regarded as feminine]. But by contrast see the 
words, “the desert Arabs said,”(49:14) the verb said in this case being in the feminine, 
even though its subject designates a community of men. Herein lies an indication, that 
an  association  of  weak,  meek  and  soft  women  gains  strength,  toughness  and  force, 
and even acquires a certain kind of virility. The use of the masculine form of the verb 
is  therefore  most  appropriate.  Strong  men,  by  contrast,  and  in  particular  Beduin 
Arabs,  trust  in  their  own  strength;  therefore  their  associations  are  weak,  for  they 
assume a stance of softness and caution and take on a kind of femininity, for which 
the use of the feminine form of the verb is most suitable. Similarly the people of truth 
submit to and place their reliance in the firm source of support that is belief in God; 
hence  they  do  not  present  their  needs  to  others  or  request  aid  and  assistance  from 
them.  If  they  do  sometimes  make  the  request,  they  will  not  adhere  to  the  persons 
concerned at all cost. But the worldly ignore in their worldly affairs the true source of 
support;  they  fall  into  weakness  and  impotence,  and  experiencing  an  acute  need  of 
assistance, come together sacrificing themselves wholeheartedly. 

The people of truth do not recognize and seek the true strength that is to be found 
in  union;  hence  they  fall  into  dispute,  as  an  evil  and  harmful  consequence  of  this 
failure. By contrast, the people of misguidance and falsehood perceive the strength to 
be found in union, by virtue of their very weakness, and thus acquire union, that most 
important means for the attainment of all goals. 

The cure and remedy  for this disease of discord among the people of truth is to 

make one’s rule of conduct the divine prohibition contained in this verse: 

Do not fall into dispute, lest you lose heart and your power depart,(8:46) 

and the wise divine command for social life contained in this verse: 

Work together for the sake of virtue and piety.(5:3) 

One must further realize how harmful to Islam dispute is, and how it helps the people 
of misguidance to triumph over the people of truth, and then, wholeheartedly and self-
sacrificingly,  join  the  caravan  of  the  people  of  truth,  with  a  sense  of  his  own  utter 
weakness and impotence. Finally, one  

 

208

must  forget  his  own  person,  abandon  hypocrisy  and  pretension,  and  lay  hold  of 
sincerity. 

SIXTH CAUSE 

Discord  among  the  people  of  truth  does  not  arise  from  lack  of  manliness, 
aspiration  and  zeal;  similarly,  the  wholehearted  union  among  the  misguided, 
neglectful  and  worldly  with  respect  to  their  worldly  affairs  does  not  result  from 
manliness,  aspiration  and  zeal.  It  is  rather  that  the  people  of  truth  are  generally 
concerned  with  benefits  to  be  had  in  the  hereafter  and  hence  direct  their  zeal, 
aspiration and manliness to those important and numerous matters. Since they do not 
devote  time  –  the  true  capital  of  man  –  to  a  single  concern,  their  union  with  their 
fellows can never become firm. Their concerns are numerous and of a wide scope. As 
for  the  neglectful  and  worldly,  they  think  only  of  the  life  of  this  world,  and  they 
firmly embrace the concerns of the life of this world with all their senses, their spirit 
and  heart,  and  cling  firmly  to  whoever  aids  them  in  those  concerns.  Like  a  mad 
diamond merchant who gives an exorbitant price for a piece of glass worth virtually 
nothing, they devote time, which is of the highest value, to matters which  in reality 
and in the view of the people of truth are worth nothing. Paying such a high price and 
offering  oneself  with  the  devotion  of  all  the  senses  will  naturally  result  in  a 
wholehearted sincerity that yields success in the matter at hand, so that the people of 
truth are defeated. As a result of this defeat, the people of truth decline into a state of 
abasement,  humiliation,  hypocrisy  and  ostentation,  and  sincerity  is  lost.  Thus  the 
people of truth are obliged to flatter and cringe before a handful of vile and lowly men 
of the world. 

O people of truth! O people of the law, people of reality and people of the path, 
all worshipping God! Confronted by this awesome disease of discord, overlook each 
other’s faults, close your eyes to each other’s shortcomings! Behave according to the 
rule of courtesy established by the criterion that is the Qur’an in the verse: 

When they pass by error, they pass by it with honourable avoidance.(25:72) 

Regard it as your primary duty – one on which your state in the hereafter depends – to 
abandon internal dissension when attacked by an enemy from the outside, and thereby 
to  deliver  the  people  of  truth  from  their  abasement  and  humiliation!  Practise  the 
brotherhood,  love  and  co-operation  insistently  enjoined  by  hundreds  of  Qur’anic 
verses  and  traditions  of  the  Prophet  (UWBP)!  Establish  with  all  of  your  powers  a 
union with your fellows and  

 

209

brothers  in  religion  that  is  stronger  than  the  union  of  the  worldly!  Do  not  fall  into 
dispute! Do not say to yourself, “Instead of spending my valuable time on such petty 
matters,  let  me  spend  it on  more  valuable  things  such  as  the  invocation  of  God  and 
meditation;” then withdrawing and weakening unity. For precisely what you imagine 
to be a matter of slight importance in this moral jihad may in fact be very great. In just 
the same way that under certain special and unusual conditions the watch kept for one 
hour by a soldier may be equal to a whole year’s worship, in this age when the people 
of  truth  have  been  defeated,  the  precious  day  that  you  spend  on  some  apparently 
minor matter concerning the moral struggle may  be worth a thousand days, just like 
the hour of that soldier. Whatever is undertaken for the sake of God cannot be divided 
into small and  great, valuable and  valueless. An  atom expended in sincerity  and for 
the sake of God’s pleasure becomes like a star. What is important is not the nature of 
the  means  employed,  but  the  result  that  it  yields.  As  long  as  the  result  is  God’s 
pleasure and the substance employed is sincerity, any means to which recourse is had 
will be great, not small. 

SEVENTH CAUSE 

Dispute  and  rivalry  among  the  people  of  truth  do  not  arise  from  jealousy  and 
greed for the world, and conversely union among the worldly and neglectful does not 
arise from generosity and magnanimity. It is rather that the people of truth are unable 
to preserve fully the magnanimity and high aspiration that proceed from the truth, or 
the  laudable  form  of  competition  that  exists  on  God’s  path.  Infiltrated  by  the 
unworthy, they partially misuse that laudable form of competition and fall into rivalry 
and dispute, causing grave harm both to themselves and to the Islamic community. As 
for the people of neglect and misguidance, in order not to lose the benefits with which 
they are infatuated and not to offend the leaders and companions they worship for the 
sake  of  benefit,  in  their  utter  humiliation,  abasement  and  lack  of  manliness,  they 
practise  union  at  all  costs  with  their  companions,  however  abominable,  treacherous 
and harmful they be, and wholeheartedly agree with their partners in whatever form 
may be dictated by their common interest. As a result of this wholeheartedness, they 
indeed attain the benefits desired. 

So  O  people  of  truth  given  to  dispute  and  afflicted  with  disaster!  It  is  through 
your loss of sincerity and  your failure to make God’s pleasure  your sole aim in this 
age  of  disaster  that  you  have  caused  the  people of  truth  to undergo  this  humiliation 
and defeat. In matters relating to religion and the hereafter there should be no rivalry, 
envy or jealousy; indeed there can be  

 

210

none  of  these  in  truth.  The  reason  for  envy  and  jealousy  is that  when  several  hands 
reach out after a single object, when several eyes are fixed on a single position, when 
several  stomachs  hunger  for  a  single  loaf  of  bread,  first  envy  arises  as  a  result  of 
conflict,  dispute  and  rivalry,  and  then  jealousy.  Since  many  people  desire  the  same 
thing in the world, and because the world, narrow and transitory as it is, cannot satisfy 
the  limitless  desires  of  man,  people  become  rivals  of  each  other.  However,  in  the 
hereafter  a  five-hundred-year  paradise  will  be  given  to  a  single  individual;  seventy 
thousand palaces  and  houris  will  be  granted  to  him;  and  every  one  of  the people  of 
Paradise  will  be  perfectly  satisfied  with  his  share.8  It  is  thus  clear  that  there  is  no 
cause for rivalry in the hereafter, nor can there be rivalry. In that case, neither should 
there  be  any  rivalry  with  respect  to  those  good  deeds  that  entail  reward  in  the 
hereafter;  there  is  no  room  for  jealousy  here.  The  one  jealous  here  is  either  a 
hypocrite, seeking worldly result through the performance of good deeds, or a sincere 
but  ignorant  devotee,  not  knowing  the  true  purpose  of  good  deeds  and  not 
comprehending  that  sincerity  is  the  spirit  and  foundation  of  all  good  deeds.  By 
cultivating a kind of rivalry and hostility toward God’s saints, he is in fact placing in 
doubt the breadth of God’s compassion. 

An  instance  supporting  this  truth:  One  of  my  former  companions  nurtured 

hostility to someone. His enemy’s good deeds and sanctity were once  

                                                 

8 An important question raised by a significant person: According to tradition a five-hundred-year 

paradise will be given to everyone in Paradise. How can worldly intelligence comprehend this truth? 

The Answer: In this world everyone has his private and temporally limited world as broad as the 
world, the pillar of which is his life. He makes use of his world through his inner and outer senses. He 
says to himself, “The sun is my lamp, the stars are my candles.” The existence of other creatures and 
animate beings in no way negates his ownership of these; on the contrary, they brighten and illumine 
his world. In the same way, although on an infinitely higher plane, in addition to the garden of each 
believer that contains thousands of palaces and houris, there is a private five-hundred-year paradise for 
everyone, apart from the general Paradise. He will benefit from this paradise and eternity through his 
senses and feelings, according to the degree of development they have reached. The fact that others 
share in the general Paradise in no way harms his ownership or benefit, but on the contrary strengthens 
these, and adorns that vast Paradise. Man in this world benefits from a garden lasting an hour, a 
spectacle lasting a day, a country lasting a month and a journey lasting a year, with his mouth, his ear, 
his eye, his taste and all his other senses. So too, in that realm of eternity, his sense of smell and touch, 
which in this transient world barely profit from a garden lasting an hour, will benefit as if from a 
garden lasting a year. The sense of sight and hearing which here barely profit from an excursion lasting 
a year, will there be able to benefit from a five-hundred-year excursion in a manner fitting that realm, 
adorned from end to end. Every believer will benefit there according to his spiritual rank, and gain 
delight and pleasure through his senses that will expand and develop in relation to the reward he has 
earned in this world and the good deeds he has performed. 

 

211

favourably  described  in  his  presence.  He  was  not  jealous  or  upset.  Then  someone 
said,  “That  enemy  of  yours  is  courageous  and  strong.”  We  saw  a  strong  vein  of 
jealousy and rivalry suddenly appearing in that man. We said to him: 

“Sanctity  and  righteousness  bestow  a  strength  and  exaltation  like  a  jewel  of 
eternal life, yet you were not jealous of them. Now worldly strength is to be found in 
oxen, and courage in wild beasts; in comparison with sanctity and righteousness they 
are like a piece of glass compared to a diamond.” 

The man replied: 
“We have both fixed our eyes in this world on a single object. The steps that lead 
to  it  are provided by  things  such  as  courage  and strength.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  I 
was  jealous  of  him.  The  objects  and  stations  of  the  hereafter  are  without  number. 
Although he is my enemy here, there he can be my beloved and intimate brother.” 

O people of the truth and the path! The  service of the truth is  like carrying and 
preserving a great and weighty treasure. Those who carry that trust on their shoulders 
will be happy and grateful whenever powerful hands rush to their aid. Far from being 
jealous, one should proudly applaud the superior strength, effectiveness and capacity 
of those who in upright love come forward to offer their help. Why then look on true 
brothers  and  self-sacrificing  helpers in  a  spirit  of  rivalry,  thus  losing  sincerity?  You 
will  be  exposed  to  fearsome  accusations  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  of  misguidance, 
such  as  pursuing  worldly  interest  through  religion,  even  though  it  is  something  a 
hundred  times  lower  than  you  and  your  belief,  earning  your  livelihood  through  the 
knowledge of truth and rivalling others in greed and acquisitiveness. 

The  sole  remedy  for  this  disease  is  to  accuse  your own  soul  before others raise 
these charges, and always to take the side of your fellow, not your own soul. The rule 
of truth and equity established by the scholars of the art of debate is this: “Whoever 
desires,  in  debate  on  any  subject,  that  his  own  word  should  turn  out  to  be  true, 
whoever  is  happy  that  he  turns  out  to  be  right  and  his  enemy  to  be  wrong  and 
mistaken – such a person has acted unjustly.” Not only that, such a person loses, for 
when he emerges the victor in such a debate, he has not learned anything previously 
unknown to him, and his probable pride will cause him loss. But if his adversary turns 
out  to  be  right,  he  will  have  learned  something  previously  unknown  to  him  and 
thereby  gained  something  without  any  loss,  as  well  as  being  saved  from  pride.  In 
other words, one fair in his dealings and enamoured of the truth will subject the desire 
of his own soul to the demands of the truth. If  

 

212

he sees his adversary to be right, he will accept it willingly and support it happily. 

If then the people of religion, the people of truth, the people of the path, and the 
people of learning take this principle as their guide, they will attain sincerity, and be 
successful in those duties that prepare them for the hereafter. Through God’s mercy, 
they  will  be  delivered  from this  appalling  wretchedness  and  misfortune  from  which 
they presently suffer. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All Wise.(2:32) 

 

213

The Twenty-First Flash 

 
On Sincerity 

 
 

[Although  originally  the  Fourth  of  the  Seven  Matters  of  the 
Seventeenth  Note  of  the  Seventeenth  Flash,  because  of  its 
connection  with  sincerity,  it  became  the  Second  Point  of  the 
Twentieth Flash. Finally, due to its luminous character, it was 
included in the Flashes as the Twenty-First Flash.] 

 
This Flash should be read at least once a fortnight 
 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Do not fall into dispute, lest you lose heart and your power depart.(8:46) * 
And  stand  before  God  in  a  devout  [frame  of  mind].(2:238)  *  Truly  he 
succeeds that purifies it, * And he fails that corrupts it.(91:9-10) * Nor sell 
my signs for a small price.(2:41. etc.)  

O  my  brothers  of  the  hereafter!  And  O  my  companions  in  the  service  of  the 
Qur’an! You should know – and you do know – that in this world sincerity is the most 
important principle in works pertaining to the hereafter; it is the greatest strength, the 
most acceptable intercessor, the firmest point of support, the shortest way to reality, 
the  most  acceptable  prayer,  the  most  wondrous  means  of  achieving  one’s  goal,  the 
highest quality, and the purest worship. Since sincerity comprises much strength and 
many  lights  like those mentioned above; and since at this dreadful time, despite our 
small number and weak, impoverished, and powerless state and our being confronted 
by  terrible  enemies  and  suffering  severe  oppression  in  the  midst  of  aggressive 
innovations  and  misguidance,  the  extremely  heavy,  important,  general,  and  sacred 
duty  of  serving  belief  and  the  Qur’an  has  been  placed  on  our  shoulders  by  divine 
grace, we are certainly compelled more than anyone to work with all our strength to 
gain sincerity. We need more than anything to instil sincerity in ourselves. Otherwise 
what we have achieved  

 

214

so far in our sacred service will  in part be lost and will  not persist; and we shall be 
held  responsible;  we  shall  manifest  the  severe  threat  contained  in  the  divine 
prohibition, 

Nor sell my signs for a small price.(2:41, etc.) 

We shall otherwise destroy sincerity, thus harming eternal  happiness for the  sake of 
meaningless,  unnecessary,  harmful,  sad,  self-centred,  tedious,  hypocritical  base 
feelings and insignificant benefits. And if we were to do that, we would violate all our 
brothers’  rights,  transgress  against  the  duty  of  service  to  the  Qur’an,  and  be 
disrespectful towards the sacredness of the truths of belief. 

My brothers! There are many obstacles before significant good works. Satans put 
up a powerful struggle against those who assist in them. In the face of those obstacles 
and satans you have to rely on the strength of sincerity. You should avoid things that 
harm  sincerity  as  you  avoid  snakes  and scorpions.  In  accordance  with  the  words  of 
Joseph (Upon whom be peace), 

Nor do I absolve my own self [of blame]; the [human] soul is certainly prone 
to evil, unless my Sustainer do bestow His mercy,(12:53) 

the  evil-commanding  soul  cannot  be  relied  upon.  Do  not  let  egotism  and  the  soul 
deceive  you!  To  gain  sincerity  and  preserve  it  you  should  take  as  your  guide  the 
following rules: 

YOUR FIRST RULE 

You should seek divine pleasure in your actions. If Almighty God is pleased, it is 
of no importance if the whole world even is displeased. If  He accepts an action and 
everyone  else  rejects  it,  their  rejection  has  no  effect.  Once  His  pleasure  has  been 
gained and  He  has  accepted  an  action,  even  if  you do  not  ask  it  of Him,  should  He 
wish it and His wisdom requires it, He will make others accept it. He will make them 
consent to it too. For this reason, to seek divine pleasure should be the sole aim in this 
service. 

YOUR SECOND RULE 

This  is  not  to  criticize  your  brothers  who  are  employed  in  this  service  of  the 
Qur’an,  and  not  to  excite  their  envy  by  displaying  superior  virtues.  For  just  as  one 
hand  cannot  compete  with  the  other,  so  one  eye  cannot  criticize  the  other,  nor  the 
tongue  object  to  the  ear,  nor  the  heart  see  the  spirit’s  faults.  Each  of  a  person’s 
members completes the deficiencies of the others, veils their faults, assists their needs, 
and helps them out in their duties. Otherwise his life would be extinguished, his spirit 
flee, and his body fall apart. 

 

215

Similarly,  the  components  of  a  factory’s  machinery  cannot  compete  with  one 
another  in  rivalry,  take  precedence  over  each  other,  or  dominate  each  other.  They 
cannot  spy  out  one  another’s  faults  and  criticize  each  other,  destroy  the  other’s 
eagerness  for  work,  and  cause  him  to  become  idle.  They  rather  assist  each  other’s 
motions  with  all  their  capacity  in  order  to  achieve  the  common  goal;  they  march 
towards  the  aim  of  their  creation  in  true  solidarity  and  unity.  If  even  the  slightest 
aggression  or  desire  to  dominate  were  to  interfere,  it  would  throw  the  factory  into 
confusion,  cancelling  its  products  and  results.  The  factory’s  owner  would  then 
demolish the factory entirely. 

O  Risale-i  Nur  students  and servants  of  the  Qur’an!  You  and  I  are  members of 
such a collective personality,  worthy of the title of the perfect man. We are  like the 
components of a factory’s machinery which produces eternal happiness within eternal 
life. We are hands working on a dominical boat which will disembark the community 
of Muhammad (UWBP) at the realm of peace, the shore of salvation. So we are surely 
in  need  of  solidarity  and  true  union,  obtained  through  gaining  sincerity  –  for  the 
mystery  of  sincerity  secures  through  four  individuals  the  moral  strength  of  one 
thousand one hundred and eleven – indeed, we are compelled to obtain it. 

Yes,  if  three  alifs  do  not  unite,  they  have  the  value  of  three,  but  on  uniting, 
through the mystery of numbers they acquire the value of one hundred and eleven. If 
four times four remain apart, they have a value of sixteen. But if, through the mystery 
of brotherhood and having a common goal and joint duty, they unite coming together 
shoulder to shoulder on a  line, they acquire the strength and  value of four thousand 
four hundred and forty-four. Indeed, numerous historical events testify that the moral 
strength  and  value  of  sixteen  self-sacrificing  brothers  have  exceeded  that  of  four 
thousand.  

The  underlying  reason  for  this  mystery  is  this:  each  member  of  a  true,  sincere 
union may see with the eyes of the other brothers, and hear with their ears, as if each 
person of a true union of ten acquires the value and strength to see with twenty eyes, 
think with ten minds, hear with twenty ears, and work with twenty hands.1 

                                                 

1 Yes, through the mystery of sincerity heartfelt solidarity and union produce innumerable 
benefits, and are also an effective shield and point of support against fear, and even death. For if death 
comes, it takes one spirit. But since through the mystery of true brotherhood on the way of divine 
pleasure in works connected with the hereafter there are spirits to the number of brothers, if one of 
them dies, he meets death happily, saying: “My other spirits remain alive, for they in effect make life 
continue for me by constantly earning me reward, so I am not dying. I live in respect of merit through 
their spirits; I am only dying in respect of sin.” And he lays down in peace. 

 

216

YOUR THIRD RULE 

You should know that all  your strength  lies  in sincerity and truth. Yes, strength 
lies in truth and sincerity. Even those who do wrong gain strength from their sincerity 
in their wrongdoing. 

Evidence that  strength  lies  in truth and sincerity  is this service of ours. A small 
amount of sincerity in our work proves this claim and is evidence for itself. For seven 
or eight years of service to learning and religion here has surpassed a hundredfold the 
twenty years of service I performed in my native region and in Istanbul. And in these 
places  the  people  assisting  me  were  a  hundred  or  even  a  thousand  times  more 
numerous than my brothers who work together with me here, where I am alone, with 
no  one,  a  stranger,  semi-literate,  under  the  surveillance  of  unfair  officials  and 
persecuted by them. I have absolutely no doubt that the service I have carried out with 
you these seven or eight years and the moral strength which has resulted in success a 
hundred  times  greater  than  formerly,  has  arisen  from  your  sincerity.  I  have  also  to 
confess  that  by  your  heartfelt  sincerity,  you  have  saved  me  to  an  extent  from  the 
hypocrisy  which  used  to  flatter  my  soul  under  the  veil  of  fame  and  renown.  God 
willing, you will be successful in gaining absolute sincerity, and you will cause me to 
gain it too. 

You should be aware that it is because of this mystery of sincerity that ‘Ali2 (May 
God  be  pleased  with  him)  and  Ghawth  al-A‘zam3  (May  his  mystery  be  sanctified) 
honour  you  with  their  miraculous  wonder-working  and  wondrous  vision  of  the 
Unseen.  They  offer  you  consolation  in  protecting  manner  and  applaud  your  service. 
Yes,  you should have no doubt that this attention of theirs is because of sincerity. If 
you knowingly harm it, it is from them that you will receive punishment. You should 
bear in mind “the blows of compassion” in the Tenth Flash. 

If  you want to be backed by the support of such spiritual heroes, and have them 

as masters at your head, gain complete sincerity in accordance with the verse, 

But give them preference over themselves.(59:9) 

Prefer  your  brothers’  souls  to  your  own  soul  in  honour,  rank,  acclaim,  and  in  the 
things your soul enjoys like material benefits, and even in such  

                                                 

2 ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib: the son of the Prophet Muhammad’s (UWBP) uncle, who from a young age 
was brought up by the Prophet (UWBP), who later married him to his daughter, Fatima. ‘Ali was one 
of the first to believe in the Qur’anic revelation, and was famous for his heroism in battle. He became 
the fourth caliph. 

3 Sayyid ‘Abd al-Qadir Gilani (Geylanî), known as the Gawth al-A‘zam, was the eponym of the 

Qadiri Order and a towering spiritual figure in the history of Islam. He lived 470/1077-561/1166 and is 
buried in Baghdad. 

 

217

innocent, harmless benefits as informing a needy believer about one of the fine truths 
of belief. If possible, encourage one of your disinclined companions to inform him, so 
that  your  soul  does  not  become  conceited.  If  you  have  the  desire  to  tell  him  the 
edifying matter to gain the reward, it surely is not a sin and there is no harm in it, but 
the essence of sincerity between you might be damaged. 

YOUR FOURTH RULE 

This  is  to  imagine  your brothers’  virtues  and merits  in  your own  selves,  and  to 
thankfully take pride at their glory. The Sufis have terms they use among themselves, 
“annihilation in the shaykh,” “annihilation in the Prophet;” I am not a Sufi, but these 
principles of theirs make a  good rule in our way, in the form of “annihilation  in the 
brothers.”  Among  brothers  this  is  called  “tefânî;”  that  is,  “annihilation  in  one 
another.”  That  is  to  say,  to  forget  the  feelings  of  one’s  own  carnal  soul,  and  live  in 
one’s  mind  with  one’s  brothers’  virtues and  feelings.  In  any  event,  the  basis of  our 
way  is brotherhood; it is  not the relationship (lit.  means) between  father and son, or 
shaykh and follower; it is that of true brotherhood. At the very most a Master [Ustad] 
intervenes.  Our  way  is  the  closest  friendship.  This  friendship  necessitates  being  the 
closest  friend,  the  most  sacrificing  companion,  the  most  appreciative  comrade,  the 
noblest  brother.  The  essence  of  such  friendship  is  true  sincerity.  The  person  who 
spoils this true sincerity falls from the high pinnacle of this friendship, possibly to the 
bottom of a deep depression. There is nothing onto which he may cling in between. 

Yes, the way is seen to be two. There is the possibility that those who part now 
from this way of ours, the great highway of the Qur’an, are unknowingly helping the 
forces  of  irreligion,  who  are  hostile  to  us.  God  willing,  those  who  enter  the  sacred 
bounds  of  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  by  way  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  will 
always add strength to light, sincerity, and belief, and will avoid such pitfalls. 

O my companions in the service of the Qur’an! One of the most effective means 
of attaining and preserving sincerity is “contemplation of death.” Yes, just as worldly 
ambition  damages  sincerity  and  drives  a  person  to  hypocrisy  and  the  world,  so  the 
contemplation  of  death  causes  disgust  at  hypocrisy  and  gains  sincerity.  That  is,  to 
think of death and grasp that this world is transient, and so be saved from the tricks of 
the soul. Yes, the instruction the Sufis and people of truth received from such verses 
of the All-Wise Qur’an as, 

Every soul shall taste death.(3:185) * Truly you will die [one day], and truly 
they [too] will die [one day],(39:30) 

 

218

led  them  to  make  the  contemplation  of  death  fundamental  to  their  spiritual 
journeyings; it dispelled the illusion of eternity, the source of worldly ambition. They 
imagined  themselves  to  be  dead  and  being  placed  in  the  grave.  With  prolonged 
thought the evil-commanding soul becomes saddened and affected by such imagining 
and  gives  up  its  far-reaching  ambitions  and  hopes  to  an  extent.  There  are  numerous 
advantages  in  this  contemplation.  It  is  taught  by  the  Hadith  which  says  something 
like, “Frequently mention death which dispels pleasure and makes it bitter.”4 

However,  since  our  way  is  not  that  of  the  Sufis  but  of  reality,  we  are  not 
compelled to perform this contemplation in an imaginary  and hypothetical  form like 
they do. To do so is anyway not in conformity with the way of reality. Our way is not 
to bring the future to the present by thinking of the end, but to travel in the mind to 
the  future  from  the  present  in  respect  of  reality,  and  to  gaze  on  it.  Yes,  dispensing 
with the need to imagine, one may look on one’s own corpse, the single fruit on the 
tree of this brief life. One may look on one’s own death, and if one goes a bit further, 
see the death of this century, and going further still, observe the death of this world, 
opening up the way to complete sincerity. 

T h e  S e c o n d  M e a n s : By attaining a sense of the divine presence through 
the  strength  of  certain,  affirmative  belief  and  through  the  lights  proceeding  from 
reflective  thought  on  creatures  which  leads  to  knowledge  of  the  Maker; by  thinking 
that  the  Compassionate  Creator  is  all-present  and  seeing;  and  by  not  seeking  the 
attention of any other than He, and realizing that looking to others in His presence or 
seeking  help  from  them  is  contrary  to  right  conduct  in  His  presence,  one  may  be 
saved from such hypocrisy and gain sincerity. However, this comprises many degrees 
and stages. Whichever degree a person reaches, he will profit to that extent. There are 
numerous truths  in the Risale-i Nur that will  save a person from hypocrisy and gain 
him sincerity, so referring him to those, we cut short the discussion here. 

Of  the  very  many  things  that  destroy  sincerity  and  drive  one  to  hypocrisy,  we 

shall briefly explain two or three. 

The  First:  Rivalry  towards  material  advantages  slowly  destroys  sincerity.  It  is 
also detrimental to the results of our service. So too it causes the material benefits to 
be lost. This nation has always nurtured respect for those who work for reality and the 
hereafter,  and  has  assisted  them.  With  the  intention  of  actively  sharing  in  their 
genuine sincerity and in the works  

                                                 

iv, 321. 

4 Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 4; Qiyama, 26; Nasa’i, Jana’iz, 3; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 31; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, 

 

219

they carry out devotedly, it has always showed respect by assisting them with material 
benefits  like  alms  and  gifts  to  save  them  from  preoccupation  with  securing  their 
material  needs  and  wasting  their  time.  But  such  assistance  and  benefit  may  not  be 
sought;  it  is  given.  It  may  not  even  be  sought  through  the  tongue  of  disposition  by 
inwardly desiring it or awaiting it. It should rather be given unexpectedly, otherwise 
sincerity  will be harmed.  It  would otherwise bring  a  person  close  to  the  prohibition 
stated by the verse, 

Nor sell my signs for a small price,(2:41, etc.) 

and in part destroys the action. 

The  evil-commanding  soul  selfishly  excites  a  feeling  of  rivalry  towards  a  true 
brother and companion in that particular service by first desiring and expecting such a 
material benefit, then not allowing it to go to someone else. Sincerity is damaged, and 
the sacredness of the service is lost, and the person becomes disagreeable in the eyes 
of the people of reality.  He also loses the material benefit. This subject needs much 
discussion, but I shall curtail it and only mention two examples which will strengthen 
sincerity and true union between my true brothers. 

First  Example:  ‘The  worldly,’  and  even  certain  politicians  and  secret  societies 
and  manipulators  of  society,  have  adopted  as  their  guiding  principle,  that  of  shared 
property,  in  order  to  procure  wealth  and  power.  They  do  acquire  an  extraordinary 
strength and advantage, despite all their exploitation and losses. However, the nature 
of common property does not change with sharing, despite its many harms. Although 
each  partner  is  as  though  the owner  and  supervisor of  the rest  in  one  respect,  he  is 
unable to profit from it. 

Nevertheless,  if  the  principle  of  shared  property  is  applied  to  the  works  of  the 
hereafter, it accumulates vast benefits and produces no loss. For it means that all the 
property passes to the hands of each partner. For example, there are four or five men. 
With  the  idea  of  sharing,  one  of  them  brings  paraffin,  another  a  wick,  another  the 
lamp, another the mantle, and the fifth matches; they assemble the lamp and light it. 
Each of them becomes the owner of a complete lamp. If each of those partners has a 
full-length mirror on a wall, he will be reflected in it together with the lamp and room, 
without deficiency or being split up. 

Just the  same  are  mutual  participation  in  the  goods of  the  hereafter  through  the 
mystery of sincerity, and co-operation through the mystery of brotherhood, and joint 
enterprise through the mystery of unity: the total obtained by those joint acts, and all 
the light, enters the book of good deeds of each person taking part. This is a fact and 
has been witnessed by the  

 

220

people of reality. It is required also by the breadth of divine mercy and munificence. 

My brothers! God willing, material benefits will not provoke rivalry among you. 
You may possibly be deceived in regard to the benefits of the hereafter like some of 
those who follow the Sufi path. But how can some personal, minor merit be compared 
with the merit and light manifested in respect of the shared actions mentioned in the 
above example? 

Second Example: Craftsmen are obtaining significant wealth by co-operating so 
as  to  profit  more  from  the  products  of  their  crafts.  Formerly  ten  manufacturers  of 
sewing  needles  all worked on their own, and the fruit of their  individual labour was 
three  needles  a  day.  Then  following  the  rule  of  joint  enterprise  the  ten  men  united. 
One brought the iron, one lit the furnace, one pierced the needles, one placed them in 
the furnace, and another sharpened the points, and so on; each was occupied with only 
part of the process of needle-making. Since the work in which one man was employed 
was  simple,  he  did  not  waste  time;  he  acquired  skill  and  performed  the  work  with 
considerable speed. The manufacturers divided up the work performed in accordance 
with  the rule  of  joint  enterprise  and  the division  of  labour: they  saw  that  instead  of 
three  needles  a  day  for  each  man,  it  worked  out  at  three  hundred.  This  event  was 
widely published among the craftsmen of ‘the worldly’ in order to encourage them to 
pool their labour. 

My  brothers!  Since union  and  accord  in  worldly  matters  and  in  dense  materials 
yield  such  results  and  advantages,  you  can  compare  how  vastly  profitable  it  is  for 
each  to  reflect  in  his  own  mirror  through  divine  grace  the  light  of  all,  which  is 
luminous  and  pertains  to  the  hereafter  and  does  not  need  to  be  divided  up  and 
fragmented, and to gain the equivalent reward of all of them. This huge profit should 
not be lost through rivalry and insincerity.   

The Second Obstacle Destroying Sincerity: This is to flatter the  ego and give 
high status to the evil-commanding soul by attracting attention to oneself and public 
acclaim,  driven  by  the  desire  for  fame,  renown,  and  position.  This  is  a  serious 
spiritual sickness that also opens the door to the hypocrisy and self-centredness called 
the hidden association of partners with God, and damages sincerity. 

My brothers! Our way in the service of the Qur’an is reality and brotherhood, and 
the  true  meaning  of  brotherhood  is  to  annihilate  one’s  personality  among  one’s 
brothers5 and to prefer their souls to one’s own. Rivalry of  

                                                 

5 Yes, happy is he who, in order to gain access to a large pool of fresh water filtered from the 
spring of the Qur’an, casts his personality and egotism – which are like blocks of ice – into the pool 
and melts them. 

 

221

this sort arising from desire for rank and position should not therefore be provoked. It 
is  altogether  opposed  to  our  way.  The  brothers’  honour  may  be  all  the  individuals’ 
generally;  so  I  am  hopeful  that  sacrificing  that  great  collective  honour  for personal, 
selfish, competitive, minor fame and renown is far from being something the Risale-i 
Nur  students  would do.  Yes,  the  heart,  mind,  and  spirit  of  the  Risale-i Nur  students 
would  not  stoop  to  such  lowly,  harmful,  inferior  things.  But  everyone  has  an  evil-
commanding  soul,  and  sometimes  the  soul’s  emotions  affect  certain  veins  of 
character, and predominate to an extent in spite of the heart, mind, and spirit; I am not 
accusing  your  hearts,  minds,  and  spirits.  I  have  confidence  in  you  because  of  the 
effect of the Risale-i Nur. But the soul, desires, emotions, and imagination sometimes 
deceive. For this reason you sometimes receive severe warnings. The severity looks to 
the soul, emotions, desires, and imagination; act cautiously. 

Yes, if our way had been subjection to a shaykh, there would have been a single 
rank, or limited ranks, and numerous capacities would have been appointed to them. 
There  could  have  been  envy  and  selfishness.  But  our  way  is  brotherhood.  Among 
brothers there is no position of father among them, nor can they assume the position 
of spiritual guide. In brotherhood ranks are broad and cannot be the cause of envious 
jostling.  At  the  most  brother  helps  and  supports  brother;  he  completes  his  service. 
Evidence that much harm and many mistakes have resulted from the envy, greed for 
spiritual reward, and high aspirations of the paths of spiritual  guides are the conflict 
and rivalry  among those who follow them despite their  vast attainments, perfections 
and  benefits,  which  have  had  the  disastrous  consequence  of  their  vast  and  sacred 
power being unable to withstand the gales of innovation. 

The  Third  Obstacle:  This  is  fear  and  greed.  This  obstacle  has  been  explained 
comprehensively in The Six Attacks6 together with other obstacles. We therefore refer 
you  to  that,  and  making  all  the  most  beautiful  names  of  the  Most  Merciful  of  the 
Merciful  our  intercessor,  we  beseech  that  He  will  grant  us  success  in  attaining 
complete sincerity. 

O  God! For  the  sake of Sura al-Ikhlas, place us among  Your  servants  who 
attain sincerity. Amen. Amen. 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

                                                 

6 See, Bediuzzaman Said Nursi, Letters 1928-1932 (Istanbul: Sözler Neşriyat, new edn. 2009) the 

Sixth Section of the Twenty-Ninth Letter, pp. 474-90. (Tr.) 

 

222

A Confidential Letter to Some of my Brothers 

I shall mention a point concerning two Hadiths to my brothers who become bored 
of  writing,  and  prefer  other  recitations  during  the  Three  Months,  the  months  of 
worship,  to  writing  out  the  Risale-i  Nur,  although  to  do  this  is  worship  in  five 
respects.1 The two Hadiths are these: 

The First: “At the Last Judgement, the ink spent by the scholars of religion will 

weigh equally to the blood of the martyrs.”2 

The Second: “Whoever adheres to my Sunna when my community is corrupted 
shall earn the reward of a hundred martyrs.”3 That is, those who adhere to and serve 
the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  practices  and  the  Qur’an’s  truths  when  innovations  and 
misguidance are rife may gain the reward of a hundred martyrs.  

O  my  brothers  who  weary  of  writing  out  of  laziness!  And  O  my  brothers  who 
lean  to  Sufism!  These  two  Hadiths  show  that  the  black  light  flowing  from  your 
blessed,  pure  pens  serving  the  truths  of  belief  and  mysteries  of  the  Shari‘a  and 
practices of the Prophet (UWBP) at a time such as this – even a drop of their water-
of-life-like ink – may win for you on the Day of Judgement reward equal to a hundred 
drops of martyrs’ blood. So try to win it! 

If you say: It says scholars in the Hadith and some of us are only scribes. 
The Answer: Anyone who reads these treatises for a year and comprehends and 
accepts them, may become a valuable, exacting scholar at this time. Even if he does 
not  understand  them,  since  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  have  a  collective  personality, 
doubtless  it  is  learned.  As  for  your  pens,  they  are  the  immaterial  fingers  of  that 
collective  personality.  With  your  good  opinion  of  me,  you  have  afforded  me  the 
position  of  Master  (Ustad)  and  religious  scholar,  and  attached  yourselves  to  me 
although in my view I am unworthy. I am unlettered and have difficulty in writing, so 
your  pens  may  be  thought  of  as  mine;  you  will  receive  the  reward  indicated  in  the 
Hadith. 

                                                                              S a i d   N u r s i 
 

                                                 

1 We asked for an explanation of the five sorts of worship which our Master indicates in this 

valuable letter. The explanation we received is below: 

i. To strive against the people of misguidance, the most important struggle. 
ii. To serve our Master in the form of helping him spread the truth. 
iii. To serve Muslims in respect of belief. 
iv. To obtain knowledge by means of the pen. 
v. To perform worship in the form of reflective thought, one hour of which may sometimes be 

equal to a year’s worship.                      Signed:  Rüştü, Hüsrev, Re’fet 

 
2 al-Ghazali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, i, 6; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, vi, 466; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-

Khafa’, ii, 561; al-Suyuti, Jami‘ al-Saghir, No: 10026. 

3 Ibn ‘Adiyy, al-Kamil fi’l-Du‘afa’, ii, 739; al-Mundhiri, al-Targhib wa’l-Tarhib, i, 41; Tabarani, 
al-Majma‘ al-Kabir, 1394; ‘Ali ibn Husamuddin, Muntakhabat Kanz al-‘Ummal, i, 100; al-Haythami, 
Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, vii, 282. 

 

 

 

 

 

223

The Twenty-Second Flash 

 
In His Name, be He glorified! 

This  highly  confidential  short treatise, which I wrote twenty-
two years ago specifically for my closest and most select and 
sincere  brothers  while  in  the  village  of  Barla  in  the  Province 
of  Isparta,  I  am  dedicating  to  Isparta’s  just  Governor, 
judiciary, and police. This is because of the concern shown by 
both  the  people  and the  authorities  of  Isparta.  If  appropriate, 
several copies should be written by typewriter in either the old 
or new letters so that those who have been holding me under 
surveillance  and  searching  out  my  secrets  these  twenty-five 
years  may  know  that  I  have  no  hidden  secrets  whatsoever. 
They should know that my most hidden secret is this treatise! 
                                                                S a i d  N u r s i 

Three Indications 

[While being the Third Matter of the Seventeenth Note of the 
Seventeenth  Flash,  because  of 
and 
comprehensiveness  of 
the  questions  and  strength  and 
brilliance of the answers, this was incorporated in the Flashes 
as  the  Twenty-Second  Flash  of  the  Thirty-First  Letter.  The 
Flashes had to give it a place. It is confidential and special to 
my most select, sincere, and loyal brothers.]  

the  harshness 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
And if anyone puts his trust in God, sufficient is [God] for him. For God will 
surely accomplish His purpose. Verily for all things has God appointed a due 
proportion.(65:3) 

This matter consists of three indications. 

 

224

FIRST INDICATION 

An important question about my person and the Risale-i Nur: many people ask, 
“Although  you  have  not  meddled  in  ‘the  worldly’s’  world,  why  do  they  meddle  in 
your  hereafter  at  every  opportunity?  Whereas  no  government’s  laws  interfere  with 
recluses and people who have abandoned the world?” 

T h e  A n s w e r : The New Said’s reply to this question is silence. The New 
Said says: “Let divine determining give the answer for me.” Nevertheless, since I’m 
compelled to, the Old Said’s head, which the New Said has borrowed on trust, says: 
those  who  should  give  the  answer  to  this  question  are  the  authorities  of  Isparta 
Province,  and  its  people.  For  they  are  much  more  concerned  with  the  meaning 
underlying  this  question  than  I  am.  Since  the  administration,  which  consists  of 
thousands of people, and the people, who number hundreds of thousands, are obliged 
to  consider  it  and  defend  it  in  my  place,  why  should  I  speak  with  the  prosecutors 
unnecessarily, and defend myself? 

I have been in this province for nine  years, and I am gradually turning my back 
more and more on their world. No aspect of my  life  has remained hidden. Even my 
most secret and confidential treatises have come into the hands of the government and 
some of  the  deputies.  If  I  had meddled  at  all  in worldly  matters, which  would have 
caused ‘the worldly’ alarm and anxiety, or if I had made any attempt to meddle, or if I 
had  had  any  idea  of doing  so,  this  province  and  the  local  government  in  the  towns 
would have known. But although I have been under their scrutiny and surveillance for 
nine  years,  and  I  too  have  not  hesitated  to  divulge  my  secrets  to  those  who  have 
visited  me,  the  authorities  have  remained  silent  and  have  not bothered  me.  If  I  had 
displayed  any  fault  that  could  have  been  harmful  to  this  country’s  happiness  and 
future,  and  to  its  people,  over  this  nine  years  everyone  from  the  Governor  to  the 
village  police  chief  would  have  been  responsible.  So  to  save  themselves  from  such 
responsibility they are obliged to defend me in the face of those who make molehills 
into mountains concerning me, and make the mountains into molehills. In which case, 
I refer this question to them to answer. 

The reason the people of this province are mostly obliged to defend me more than 
I  do  myself  is  that  with  hundreds  of  treatises  that  have  demonstrated  their 
effectiveness materially and  in  fact,  I  have worked these  nine  years for their  eternal 
life and strength of belief and happiness in life, for they are both brothers, and friends, 
and blessed; and no upset or harm at all  has been suffered by anyone on account of 
the treatises; and not the slightest  

 

225

sign of anything political or worldly has been encountered; and, praise be to God, by 
means of the Risale-i Nur, this province of Isparta has gained in respect of strength of 
belief and firmness in religion a degree of blessedness resembling the blessedness of 
Damascus in  former times and of al-Azhar in Egypt; and the Risale-i Nur has made 
the  power  of  belief  prevail  over  indifference  and  the  desire  to  worship  prevail  over 
vice  in  the province,  and  has  made  it  more religious  than  any  other  province. Since 
this  is  the  case,  all  its  people,  even  supposing  they  are  irreligious,  are  obliged  to 
defend me and the Risale-i Nur. While they have such important rights of defence, my 
unimportant right does not drive me to defend myself  now that I, lacking all power, 
have completed my duty and, thanks be to God, thousands of students  have worked 
and are working in my place. Someone with so many thousands of advocates does not 
defend his own case. 

SECOND INDICATION 

The answer to a critical question. 
‘The worldly’ ask: “Why are you angry with us? You have not made application 
to  us  even  once,  and  are  silent.  You  complain  about  us  bitterly,  saying  that  we  are 
unjust  towards  you.  But  we  have  our  principles,  we  have  our  particular  rules  as 
demanded by the times, and you do not accept that they should be applied to you. The 
person who applies the law is not a tyrant, and the person who does not accept the law 
is rebellious. For instance,  in this age of  freedom and new republican era  which we 
have  inaugurated, the principle – on the basis of equality – of abolishing oppression 
and subjugation of others is as though our fundamental law. However, it is understood 
from your open behaviour and your adventurous life in the former period that whether 
by  assuming  the  position of  hoja  or  of  being  an  ascetic,  you  try  to  draw  the  public 
gaze on yourself and attract attention, so to secure a power and social position outside 
the government’s influence. This may appear desirable within – according to current 
terminology  –  the  despotic  tyranny  of  the  bourgeouisie.  But  since  the  principles  of 
pure  socialism  and  bolshevism,  which  have  emerged  with  the  awakening  and 
ascendancy of the common people, are more conformable with our interests, we have 
accepted them, and your position is disagreeable to us; it opposes our principles. For 
this reason you do not have the right to complain about or be angry at the distress we 
cause you.” 

T h e  A n s w e r : If someone who opens up a new way in the  life of  human 
society does not act  in  conformity with the  natural laws in  force in the universe,  he 
cannot be successful  in beneficial works and in progress. All  his  acts come to serve 
the interests of evil and destruction. Since  

 

226

actions  have  to  be  in  conformity  with  the  natural  laws,  absolute  equality  can  be 
applied only by changing human nature and removing the fundamental wisdom in the 
mankind’s  creation.  Yes,  by  birth  and  the  way  I  have  lived  I  am  from  the  class  of 
common people, and I am one of those who by temperament and intellectually have 
accepted  the  way  of  equality  of  rights.  And  due  to  compassion  and  the  justice 
proceeding  from Islam, I am a person who for a long time has opposed and worked 
against  the  despotism  and  oppression  of  the  elite  class  called  the  bourgeouisie.  I 
therefore  support  total  justice  with  all  my  strength,  and  oppose  tyranny,  oppression, 
arbitrary power, and despotism. 

However, human nature and the underlying wisdom in humankind are contrary to 
the  law of absolute equality. For to demonstrate  His perfect power and wisdom, the 
All-Wise Creator produces many crops from a single thing, causes many books to be 
written  on  a  single  page,  and  causes  many  functions  to  be  performed  by  a  single 
thing; and in the same way, He causes the duties of thousands of species to be carried 
out by humankind. It is because of this great mystery that Almighty God created man 
with a  nature that would produce the shoots of thousands of species and display the 
levels of the thousands of other species of living creatures. No limit was placed on his 
powers, subtle faculties, and senses like the other animals; since He left him free and 
gave him a capacity whereby his senses could roam through endless degrees, although 
only  one  species,  mankind  became  like  thousands  of  species.  For  this  reason,  man 
became  vicegerent  of  the  earth,  the  result  of  the  universe,  and  monarch  of  animate 
beings. 

The most important leaven and mechanism giving rise to the variety in mankind 
is  competition and the true virtue resulting from belief.  Virtue can only be removed 
through  changing  human  nature,  extinguishing  the  reason,  killing  the  heart,  and 
annihilating  the  spirit.  Yes,  this  age  with  its  awesome  tyranny  under  the  veil  of 
freedom deserves  to  be  struck  in  the  face  with  the  following  masterly  lines,  which, 
written  by  a  most  important  person,1  have  been  wrongly  brandished  in  his  face, 
although he deserved no slap: 

It is not possible through tyranny and injustice to destroy freedom; 
Try to remove consciousness, if you can, from humankind.  
In place of these lines, I say, in order to strike this age in the face: 

It is not possible through tyranny and injustice to destroy reality; 
Try to annihilate the heart, if you can, in humankind. 

Or, 

                                                 

1 Namık Kemal (1840-1888) in his famous kaside ... 

 

227

It is not possible through tyranny and injustice to destroy virtue;  
Try to annihilate the conscience, if you can, in humankind. 
Yes, just as the virtue arising from belief cannot be the cause of oppression, so it 
cannot  be  the  cause  of  despotism.  Oppression  and  arbitrary  despotism  indicate  the 
absence of virtue. The chief way the people of virtue in particular interfere in the life 
of society is through impotence, poverty, and humility. All praise be to God, my life 
has passed on this way, and is passing on it. I do not claim this out of pride, saying 
that I possess some virtue. I say the following as thanks and to make known a divine 
bounty: 

Through His grace and munificence, Almighty God bestowed on me the virtue of 
working for  the  sciences  of  belief  and  the  Qur’an.  All praise  be  to  God,  throughout 
my  life I  have spent this divine bounty for the benefit and happiness of this Muslim 
nation, and just as at no time have I used it to dominate and oppress people, so for an 
important reason I detest public attention and being fêted by people, which is sought 
after  by  the  neglectful;  I  flee  from  it.  Twenty  years  of  my  former  life  were  lost 
because of it, so I look on it as harmful for me. But since I know that public attention 
is a sign that the people like the Risale-i Nur, I do not put them off. 

O you whose view is restricted to the life of this world! In no way have I meddled 
in your world, nor have I had anything to do with your principles, nor as is testified to 
by my life these nine years of captivity, have I had any intention or desire to meddle 
in the world again. So according to what law  have  you inflicted all this surveillance 
and oppression on me as though I were an old oppressor who was ever ready to seize 
an opportunity and supported the idea of tyranny and despotism? No government  in 
the world permits such treatment over and above the  law, nor is it recommended by 
anyone. It is not only me who is sick of the ill-treatment I have had meted out to me 
so far, if they knew of it all mankind would be disgusted, and even the universe! 

THIRD INDICATION 

A fallacious, crazy question. 
Some  members  of  the  judiciary  say:  “Since  you  reside  in  this  country,  you 
should abide by its republican laws. So why do you elude those laws under the cloak 
of being a recluse? For instance, according to the present laws of the government, it is 
opposed to one of the principles of the republic, which is based on equality, to assume 
some virtue, some merit, outside one’s duty, and through it to dominate some of the 
nation and exercise power and influence. Why do you have your hand kissed, though 
you hold  

 

228

no  position?  Why  do  you  assume  a  position  advertising  yourself  and  wanting  the 
people to listen to you?”  

T h e  A n s w e r : Those who apply the law, may apply  it to others after first 
applying  it  to  themselves.  If  you  apply  a  principle  to  others  which  you  have  not 
applied  to  yourselves,  you  are  infringing  and  opposing  your  own  principle  and  law 
before anyone. You want to apply this law of absolute equality to me. So I say this: 

Whenever a common soldier rises to the social rank of a field marshal and shares 
in the respect and acclaim the  nation shows to the field marshal and is the object of 
acclaim  and  respect  the  same  as  him;  or  whenever  the  field  marshal  becomes  as 
common  as  the  soldier  and  assumes  the  soldier’s  lowly  position  and  he  retains  no 
value  whatsoever  outside  his  duty;  and  whenever  the  most  brilliant  military 
commander  who  leads  the  army  to  victories  receives  public  acclaim,  respect  and 
affection equal to that of the dimmest common soldier; then as required by this law of 
equality of yours, you can tell me: “Don’t call yourself a hoja! Don’t accept respect! 
Deny your virtue! Serve the servants, and take beggars as your friends!” 

I f  y o u  s a y : “Respect, social position, and public attention are in regard to 
functions and particular to those who perform them when they are performing them. 
But you have no function, so you may not accept the people’s respect as though  you 
did have one.” 

T h e  A n s w e r : If man consisted only of a body, and he were going to live in 
this world for ever, and if the door of the grave were closed and death had been killed, 
then  his  duties  and  functions  would  have  been  limited  to  those  of  the  army  and 
government  officials,  and  what  you  say  would  have  had  some  meaning.  But  since 
man does not consist only of a body, and his heart, tongue, mind, and brain cannot be 
plucked  out  to  feed  his  body;  they  cannot  be  annihilated;  they  too  have  to  be 
administered. 

And since the door of the grave does not close, and since anxiety for the future 
beyond the grave is the most pressing question for everyone, then the duties based on 
the respect and obedience of the  nation are not restricted to the social, political, and 
military duties looking to its worldly life. Yes, just as it is a duty to give a passport to 
those travelling abroad, so is  it  a duty to  give a passport to those travelling to post-
eternity  and  to  give  them  a  light  for  that  dark  way,  and  there  is  no  other  duty  so 
important. It is a duty that can be denied only by denying death and giving the lie to 
the testimony of the thirty thousand witnesses who every day set their signatures with 
the seals of their corpses on the claim “Death is a reality,” affirming it.  

Since there are moral and spiritual duties based on moral and spiritual  

 

229

needs, and the most important of those duties are the passport for the journey to post-
eternity, and the pocket-torch of the heart in the darkness of the Intermediate Realm, 
and belief, the key to eternal happiness, and instruction in belief and its strengthening, 
for  sure,  the  learned  who  perform  those  duties  will  not  with  ingratitude  count  as 
nothing the divine bounties bestowed on them and the virtues arising from belief, and 
descend to the level of sinners and the dissolute. They will  not soil themselves with 
the innovations and vices of the inferior. Thus, the solitude which you do not like and 
suppose to be inequality is because of this. 

In addition to this truth I say the following, not to those like you who torment and 
pester me and who in egotism and contempt of the law of equality are as overweening 
as the Pharaoh – for the arrogant suppose humility to be abasement, so one should not 
be humble before them – I say rather to the fair-minded, the modest, and the just: 

All praise be to God, I know my faults and impotence. I do not arrogantly want 
any position superior to Muslims which demands respect. I am always aware of my 
endless  faults  and  utter  insignificance.  Finding  consolation  by  seeking  divine 
forgiveness,  I  want  not  respect  from  the  people,  but  their  prayers.  I  reckon  all  my 
friends know of this way of mine. However, while serving the All-Wise Qur’an and 
teaching the truths of belief, in order to preserve the dignity and pride of learning that 
such a rank requires, on account of those truths and in  honour of the Qur’an and  in 
order  not  to  bow  before  the  people  of  misguidance,  I  temporarily  assume  that 
dignified stance. I do not think ‘the worldly’s’ laws can oppose these points! 

Some Astonishing Treatment 

It  is  well-known  that  everywhere  teachers  judge in  accordance with  knowledge 
and  learning.  Out  of  love  of  their  profession,  in  whomever  and  wherever  they 
encounter  knowledge  and  learning,  they  will  nurture  friendship  and  respect  for  the 
person  concerned.  If  a  professor  from  an  enemy  country  visits  this  country  even, 
teachers will  visit  him out of respect for his  knowledge and learning, and offer  him 
respect. 

However,  when  the  highest  learned  council  of  the  English  asked  for  a  six-
hundred-word  answer  to  six  questions  they  asked  the  Shaykh  al-Islam’s  Office,  a 
scholar and teacher who has met with the disrespect of the education authorities here, 
answered those six questions with six words which met with approval, and answered 
with true knowledge and learning the most basic principles of the Europeans and their 
philosophers, and defeated them. Through the strength  he received from the Qur’an, 
he challenged  

 

230

those European philosophers. And in Istanbul six months before the proclamation of 
the Second Constitution, he invited both the religious scholars and scholars of modern 
science  to  debate,  and  himself  asking  no  questions  answered  completely  correctly 
without exception all questions posed to him.2 Those who have caused most distress 
to  this  scholar  and  teacher  –  who  has  devoted  all  his  life  to  the  happiness  of  this 
nation, and publishing hundreds of treatises in the people’s own language of Turkish 
has illuminated them, and is both a fellow-citizen and a co-religionist and friend and 
brother – those who have nurtured enmity towards him, and indeed been disrespectful 
towards him, have been certain members of the educational establishment as well as a 
few official hojas. 

What have you got to say to this? Is this civilization? Is it encouraging education? 
Is it patriotism? Is it love of the nation? Is it republicanism? God forbid! It is nothing 
at  all!  It  is  rather  that  divine  determining  showed  hostility  where  this  scholar  and 
teacher  hoped  for  friendship  so  that  hypocrisy  would  not  become  mixed  with  his 
learning due to respect, and he might gain sincerity. 

 
 

 

Conclusion 

An assault which in my view was astonishing,  
but was the cause of thanks 

‘The  worldly,’  who  are  extraordinarily  egotistical,  are  so  sensitive  in  their 
egotism  that  if  it  had  been  conscious,  it  would  have  reached  the  degree of  wonder-
working or of great genius. The matter in question was this:  

With  the  sensitive  balance  of  their  egotism,  they  perceive  in  me  a  little 
hypocritical egotism which I had not perceived with my soul and mind, and in violent 
fashion confront it. This eight or nine years I have experienced the following eight or 
nine  times:  after  they  have  treated  me  wrongfully  and  unjustly,  I  have  considered 
divine determining and searched out the tricks of my soul, asking why they been set 
to  pester  me.  Each  time  I  have  understood  that  my  soul  has  unconsciously  and 
naturally inclined to egotism, or else has knowingly deceived me. So then I have said 
that divine determining has acted justly towards me within those tyrants’ injustice. 

                                                 

2 The New Said says: I do not concur with the words uttered here proudly by the Old Said, but I 

cannot silence him since I gave him say in this treatise. Thinking, Let him display a bit of egotism 
before the egotists, I am silent. 

 

231

For instance, this summer my friends mounted me on a fine horse and I rode out 
into the countryside. A selfish desire for pleasure awakened in me without my being 
aware  of  it,  and  ‘the  worldly’  opposed  that  hidden  desire  of  mine  so  violently  that 
they  destroyed  both  it,  and  my  appetite  for  many  other  things.  Even,  for  example, 
after  Ramadan  and  learning  of  the  allusions  made  to  us  by  one  of  the  great,  holy 
imams  of  former  times  through  his  wonder-working  which  penetrated  the  Unseen, 
and being faced with the piety and sincerity of my brothers and the respect and good 
opinion  of  visitors,  without  my  realizing  it  my  soul  wanted  proudly  to  assume  a 
hypocritical  position  under  the  veil  of  being  thankful.  Suddenly  with  their  infinite 
sensitivity  and  in  a  way  in  which  the  very  particles  of  hypocrisy  could be  felt,  ‘the 
worldly’  attacked  me.  I thank  Almighty  God  that  their  tyranny  was  a  means  of  my 
gaining sincerity. 

And say: “O my Sustainer! I seek refuge with you from the suggestions of the 
Evil  Ones.  *  And  I  seek  refuge  with  You  lest  they  should  come  near 
me.”(23:97) 

O  God! O  Protector!  O  Preserver!  O  Best  of Protectors!  Preserve  me and 
preserve my companions from the evil of the soul and of Satan, and from the 
evil of people of misguidance and of rebellion. Amen. Amen. Amen. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

 

232

The Twenty-Third Flash 

On Nature 

 

 
 

 

[First written as the Sixteenth Note of the Seventeenth Flash, 
this part of the Risale-i Nur was later designated the Twenty-
Third Flash because of its importance. For it puts naturalistic 
atheism  to  death  with  no  chance  of  reanimation,  and  totally 
shatters the foundation stones of unbelief.] 

A Reminder 

This  treatise  explains  through  nine  ‘Impossibilities,’  themselves  comprising  at 
least ninety impossibilities, just how unreasonable, crude and superstitious is the 
way  taken  by  those  Naturalists  who  are  atheists.  In  order  to  cut  short  the 
discussion  here and because these impossibilities  have been explained in part in 
other  sections  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  some  steps  in  the  arguments  have  been 
skipped. It occurs to one, therefore, how is  it that those famous and supposedly 
brilliant philosophers accepted such a blatantly obvious superstition, and continue 
to pursue that way. Well, the fact is they cannot see its reality. And I am ready to 
explain  in  detail  and  prove  through  clear  and  decisive  arguments  to  whoever 
doubts  it  that  these  crude,  repugnant  and  unreasonable  impossibilities  are  the 
necessary  and  unavoidable  result  of  their  way;  in  fact,  the  very  gist  of  their 
creed.1 

                                                 

1 What occasioned the writing of this treatise were the attacks being made on the Qur’an by those 
who called everything that their corrupted minds could not reach a superstition, who were using Nature 
to justify unbelief, and were vilifying the truths of belief in a most aggressive and ugly fashion. Their 
attacks stirred up in my heart an intense anger which resulted in those perverted atheists and falsifiers 
of the truth receiving vehement and harsh slaps. Otherwise, the way generally followed by the Risale-i 
Nur is a mild, polite and persuasive one. 

 

233

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Their prophets said: “Is there any doubt about God, Creator of the heavens 
and the earth?”(14:10) 

By declaring through the use of a rhetorical question that there cannot and should 
not  be  any  doubt  about  God  Almighty,  this  verse  clearly  demonstrates  the  divine 
existence and unity.  

A point to be mentioned before our discussion: 

When  I  went  to  Ankara  in  1922,  the  morale  of  the  people  of  belief  was 
extremely  high  as  a  result  of  the  victory  of  the  army  of  Islam  over  the 
Greeks. But I saw that an  abominable current of  atheism was treacherously 
trying  to  subvert,  poison  and  destroy  their  minds.  “O  God!”  I  said,  “this 
monster is going to harm the fundamentals of belief.” At that point, since the 
above-mentioned verse makes self-evidently plain God’s existence and unity, 
I  sought  assistance  from  it  and  wrote  a  treatise  in  Arabic  consisting  of  a 
proof taken from the All-Wise Qur’an that was powerful enough to disperse 
and destroy that atheistic current. I had it printed in Ankara at the Yeni Gün 
Press. But, alas, those who knew Arabic were few and those who considered 
it  seriously  were  rare.  Also,  its  argument  was  in  an  extremely  concise  and 
abbreviated  form.  As  a  result,  the  treatise  did  not  have  the  effect  it  should 
have  done  and  sadly,  the  current  of  atheism  both  swelled  and  gained 
strength.  Now,  I  feel  compelled  to  explain  a  part  of  the  proof  in  Turkish. 
Since  certain  parts  of  it  have  been  fully  explained  in  other  sections  of  the 
Risale-i  Nur,  it  will  be  written  in  summary  form  here.  Those  numerous 
proofs in part unite in this proof; so each may be seen as an element of this 
proof. 

Introduction 

O man! You should be aware that there are certain phrases which are commonly used 
and  imply  unbelief.  The  believers  also  use  them,  but  without  realizing  their 
implications. We shall explain three of the most important of them. 

The First: “Causes create this.” 
The Second: “It forms itself; it comes into existence and later ceases to exist.” 
The Third: “It is natural; nature necessitates and creates it.” 
Indeed, since beings exist and this cannot be denied, and since each being comes 
into existence in a wise and artistic fashion, and since each is not outside time but is 
being continuously renewed, then, O falsifier of the  

 

234

truth,  you  are  bound  to  say  either  that  the  causes  in  the  world  create  beings,  for 
example,  this  animal;  that  is  to  say,  it  comes  into  existence  through  the  coming 
together  of  causes,  or  that  it  forms  itself,  or  that  its  coming  into  existence  is  a 
requirement and necessary effect of nature, or that it is created through the power of 
One  All-Powerful  and  All-Glorious. Since  reason  can  find  no  way  apart  from  these 
four, if the  first three  are definitely proved to be impossible, invalid and absurd, the 
way of divine unity, which is the fourth way, will necessarily and self-evidently and 
without doubt or suspicion, be proved true. 

This  to  imagine  that  the  formation  and  existence  of  things,  creatures,  occurs 
through the coming together of causes in the universe. We shall mention only three of 
its numerous impossibilities. 

THE FIRST WAY 

First Impossibility 

Imagine there is a pharmacy in which are found hundreds of jars and phials filled 
with quite different substances. A living potion and a living remedy are required from 
those medicaments. So we go to the pharmacy and see that they are to be found there 
in abundance,  yet  in great  variety.  We examine each of the potions and see that the 
ingredients have been taken in varying but precise amounts from each of the jars and 
phials,  one  ounce  from this,  three  from  that,  seven  from  the  next,  and  so on.  If  one 
ounce  too  much  or  too  little  had  been  taken,  the  potion  would  not  have  been  living 
and  would  not  have  displayed its  special  quality.  Next,  we  study  the  living  remedy. 
Again, the ingredients have been taken from the jars in a particular measure so that if 
even the most minute amount too much or too little had been taken, the remedy would 
have lost its special property. 

Now, although the jars  number more than  fifty, the  ingredients  have been taken 
from each according to measures and amounts that are all different. Is it  in any way 
possible  or  probable  that  the  phials  and  jars  should  have  been  knocked  over  by  a 
strange coincidence or sudden gust of wind and that only the precise, though different, 
amounts  that  had  been  taken  from  each  of  them  should  have  been  spilt,  and  then 
arranged themselves and come together to form the remedy?  Is there anything more 
superstitious, impossible and absurd than this? If an ass could speak, it would say: “I 
cannot accept this idea!”, and would gallop off! 

Similarly,  each  living  being  may  be  likened  to  the  living  potion  in  the 

comparison, and each plant to a living remedy. For they are composed of  

 

235

matter  that  has  been  taken  in  most  precise  measure  from  truly  numerous  and  truly 
various substances. If these are attributed to causes and the elements and it is claimed, 
“Causes  created  these,”  it  is  unreasonable,  impossible  and  absurd  a  hundred  times 
over,  just  as  it  was  to  claim  that  the  potion  in  the  pharmacy  came  into  existence 
through the phials being knocked over; by accident. 

I n  S h o r t : The vital substances in this vast pharmacy of the universe, which 
are measured on the scales of divine determining and decree of the All-Wise and Pre-
Eternal  One,  can  only  come  into  existence  through  a  boundless  wisdom,  infinite 
knowledge and all-encompassing will. The unfortunate person who declares that they 
are the work of blind, deaf and innumerable elements and causes and natures, which 
stream  like  floods;  and  the  foolish,  delirious  person  who  claims  that  that  wondrous 
remedy  poured  itself  out  when  the  phials  were  knocked  over  and  formed  itself,  are 
certainly  unreasonable  and  nonsensical.  Indeed,  such  denial  and  unbelief  is  a 
senseless absurdity. 

Second Impossibility 

If everything is not attributed to the All-Powerful and All-Glorious One, who is 
the Single One of Unity, and is attributed to causes, it necessitates that many of the 
elements and causes present in the universe  intervene  in the being of  every  animate 
creature. Whereas that different and mutually opposing and conflicting causes should 
come together of their own accord in complete order, with the  finest balance and in 
perfect  concord  in  the  being  of  a  tiny  creature,  like  a  fly,  is  such  an  obvious 
impossibility  that  anyone  with  even  an  iota  of  consciousness  would  say:  “This  is 
impossible; it could not be!” 

The tiny body of a fly is connected with most of the elements and causes in the 
universe; indeed, it is a summary of them. If it is not attributed to the Pre-Eternal and 
All-Powerful One, it is necessary for those material causes to be themselves present in 
the  immediate vicinity of the  fly; rather, for them all to enter into its tiny body; and 
even  for them to enter each of the cells of its  eyes, which are minute samples of  its 
body. For if a cause is of a material nature, it is necessary for it to be present in the 
immediate  vicinity  of,  and  inside,  its  effect.  And  this  necessitates  accepting  that the 
constituents  and  elements  of  the  universe  are  physically  present  inside  that  minute 
cell,  a  place  too  small  even  for  the  tip  of  its  antenna,  and  that  they  work  there  in 
harmony like a master. 

A way such as this, then, shames even the most foolish of the Sophists. 

 

236

Third Impossibility 

It is an established rule that, “If a being has unity, it can only have issued from a 
single being, from one hand.” Particularly if it displays a comprehensive life within a 
perfect order and sensitive balance, it demonstrates self-evidently that it did not issue 
from numerous hands, which are the cause of conflict and confusion, but that it issued 
from a single  hand that  is All-Powerful and All-Wise. Therefore, to attribute such a 
well-ordered  and  well-balanced  being  which  has  unity  to  the  jumbled  hands  of 
innumerable,  lifeless,  ignorant,  aggressive,  unconscious,  chaotic,  blind  and  deaf 
natural  causes,  the  blindness  and  deafness  of  which  increase  with  their  coming 
together  and  intermingling  among  the  ways  of  numberless  possibilities,  is  as 
unreasonable  as  accepting  innumerable  impossibilities  all  at  once.  If  we  leave  this 
impossibility  aside  and  assume  that  material  causes  have  effects,  these  effects  can 
only occur through direct contact and touch. However, the contact of natural causes is 
with the exteriors of living beings. And  yet we see that the interiors of such beings, 
where  the  hands  of  material  causes  can  neither  reach  nor  touch,  are  ten  times  more 
delicate,  well-ordered  and  perfect  as  regards  art  than  their  exteriors.  Therefore, 
although tiny animate creatures, on which the hands and organs of material causes can 
in  no  way  be  situated,  indeed  they  cannot  touch  the  creatures’  exteriors  all  at  once 
even, are more strange and wonderful as regards their art and creation than the largest 
creatures,  to  attribute  them  to  those  lifeless,  unknowing,  crude,  distant,  vast, 
conflicting,  deaf  and  blind  causes  can  result  only  from  a  deafness  and  blindness 
compounded to the number of animate beings. 

This  is  expressed  by  the  phrase  “It  forms  itself.”  It  too  involves  many 
impossibilities and is absurd and impossible in many aspects. We shall explain three 
examples of these impossibilities. 

THE SECOND WAY 

First Impossibility 

O you obstinate denier! Your egotism has made you so stupid that somehow you 
decide  to  accept  a  hundred  impossibilities all  at  once. For  you  yourself  are  a  being 
and  not  some  simple  substance  that  is  inanimate  and  unchanging.  You  resemble  an 
extremely  well-ordered  machine  that  is  constantly  being  renewed  and  a  wonderful 
palace  that  is  undergoing  continuous  change.  Particles  are  working  unceasingly  in 
your  body.  Your  body  has  a  connection  and  mutual  relations  with  the  universe,  in 
particular  with  regard  to  sustenance  and  the  perpetuation  of  the  species,  and  the 
particles  

 

237

that  work  within  it  are  careful  not  to  spoil  that  relationship  nor  to  break  the 
connection.  In  this  cautious  manner  they  set  about  their  work,  as  though  taking  the 
whole  universe  into  account.  Seeing  your  relationships  within  it,  they  take  up  their 
positions  accordingly.  And  you  benefit  with  your  external  and  inner  senses  in 
accordance with the wonderful positions that they take.  

If you do not accept that the particles in your body are tiny officials in motion in 
accordance with the law of the Pre-Eternal and All-Powerful One, or that they are an 
army, or the nibs of the pen of divine determining with each particle as the nib of a 
pen, or that they are points inscribed by the pen of power with each particle being a 
point, then in every particle working in your eye there would have to be an eye such 
as  could  see  every  limb  and  part  of  your  body  as  well  as  the  entire  universe,  with 
which  you  are  connected.  In  addition  to  this,  you  would  have  to  ascribe  to  each 
particle  an  intelligence  equivalent  to  that  of  a  hundred  geniuses,  sufficient  to  know 
and  recognize all  your  past  and  your  future,  and your  forbears  and descendants, the 
origins of all the elements of your being, and the sources of all your sustenance. 

To  attribute  the  knowledge  and  intelligence  of  a  thousand  Plato’s  to  a  single 
particle  of  one  such  as  you  who  does  not  possess  even  a  particle’s  worth  of 
intelligence in matters of this kind is a crazy superstition a thousand times over! 

Second Impossibility 

Your  being  resembles  a  thousand-domed  wondrous  palace  in  which  the  stones 
stand  together  in  suspension  and  without  support.  Indeed,  your  being  is  a  thousand 
times  more  wonderful  than  such  a  palace,  for  the  palace  of  your  being  is  being 
renewed  continuously  in  perfect  order.  Leaving  aside  your  truly  wonderful  spirit, 
heart and other subtle faculties, each member of your body resembles a single-domed 
part of  the  palace.  Like  the  stones  of  a  dome,  the  particles  stand  together  in  perfect 
balance  and  order  demonstrating  the  eye  and  the  tongue,  for  example,  each  to  be  a 
wondrous building, extraordinary work of art, and miracle of power. 

If  these  particles  were  not  officials  dependent  on  the  command  of  the  master 
architect of the universe, then each would have to be both absolutely dominant over 
all the other particles in the body and absolutely subordinate to each of them; and both 
equal to each and, with regard to its dominant position, opposed; and both the origin 
and source of most of the attributes that pertain only to the Necessarily Existent One, 
and extremely restricted; and both in absolute form, and in the form of a  

 

238

perfectly ordered individual artefact that could only, through the mystery of unity, be 
the work of the Single One of Unity. 

Anyone  with  even  a  particle  of  intelligence  would understand  what  an  obvious 

impossibility this is; to attribute such an artefact to those particles.  

Third Impossibility 

If your being is not ‘written’ by the pen of the Pre-Eternal and All-Powerful One, 
who is the Single One of  Unity, and is instead ‘printed’ by  nature and causes, there 
would  have  to  be  printing-blocks  in  nature  not  only  to  the  number  of  cells  in  your 
body,  but  to  the  number  of  their  thousands  of  combinations,  which  are  arranged  in 
concentric circles. For if this book, for example, which we hold in our hand is written, 
a single pen may write it relying on the knowledge of its writer. If, on the other hand, 
it is not written and is not attributed to its writer’s pen, and if it is said that it exists of 
its  own  accord  or  it  is  ascribed  to  nature,  then,  as  a  printed  book,  it  would  be 
necessary for there to be a different iron pen for each letter so that it could be printed. 
In  a  printing-press  there  have  to  be  pieces  of  type  to  the  number  of  letters  in  the 
alphabet so the letters in the book come into existence by means of them; pens to the 
number of those letters being necessary in place of a single pen. 

As may be seen, sometimes a whole page is written in a single large letter from 
among  those  letters  with  a  small  pen  in  fine  script,  in  which  case  a  thousand  pens 
would be necessary for one letter. Rather, if it took the form of your body, with all its 
components  one  within  the  other  in  concentric  circles,  there  would  have  to  be 
printing-blocks in each circle, for each component, to the number of the combinations 
that they form. 

Now,  see,  if  you  claim  this,  which  involves  a  hundred  impossibilities,  to  be 
possible, then again if they are not attributed to a single pen, for those well-ordered, 
artistic pieces of type, faultless printing-blocks and iron pens to be made, further pens, 
printing-blocks  and  letters  to  the  same  number  as  themselves  would  be  necessary. 
And they too would have to have been made; and they too would have to have been 
well-ordered and artistically fashioned. And so on. It would carry on in succession ad 
infinitum. 

There,  you  too  understand!  This  way  of  thinking  is  such  that  it  involves 
impossibilites and superstitions to the number of particles  in  your body. O denier of 
God! See this, and quit the way of misguidance! 

THE THIRD WAY 

“Nature  necessitates  it;  nature  makes  it.”  This  statement  contains  many 

impossibilities. We shall mention three of them by way of examples. 

 

239

First Impossibility 

If the art and creativity, which are discerning and wise, to be seen in beings and 
particularly in animate beings are not attributed to the pen of divine determining and 
power of the Pre-Eternal Sun, and instead are attributed to nature and force, which are 
blind,  deaf  and  unthinking,  it  becomes  necessary  that  nature  either  should  have 
present  in  everything  machines  and  printing-presses  for  their  creation,  or  should 
include  in  everything  power  and  wisdom  enough  to  create  and  administer  the 
universe. The reason for this is as follows: 

The  sun’s  manifestations  and  reflections  appear  in  all  small  fragments  of  glass 
and droplets on the face of the earth. If those miniature, reflected imaginary suns are 
not ascribed to the sun in the sky, it is necessary to accept the external existence of an 
actual sun in every tiny fragment of glass smaller than a match-head, which possesses 
the  sun’s  qualities  and  which,  though  small  in  size,  bears  profound  meaning;  and 
therefore to accept actual suns to the number of pieces of glass. 

In  exactly  the  same  way,  if  beings  and  animate  creatures  are  not  attributed 
directly to the manifestation of the Pre-Eternal Sun’s names, it becomes necessary to 
accept that in each being, and especially animate beings, there lies a nature, a force, or 
quite  simply  a  god  that  will  sustain  an  infinite  power  and  will,  and  knowledge  and 
wisdom. Such an idea is the most absurd and superstitious of all the impossibilities in 
the  universe.  It  demonstrates  that a  man  who  attributes  the  art  of  the  Creator of  the 
universe  to  imaginary,  insignificant,  unconscious  nature  is  without  a  doubt  less 
conscious of the truth than an animal. 

Second Impossibility 

If beings, which are most well-ordered and well-measured, wise and artistically 
fashioned, are not ascribed to One who is infinitely powerful and wise and instead are 
attributed to nature, there has to be present in every bit of soil as many factories and 
printing-presses as there are in Europe so that each bit of soil can be the means for the 
growth  and  formation  of  innumerable  flowers  and  fruits,  of  which  it  is  the  place  of 
origin and workshop. The seeds of flowers are sown in turn in a bowl of soil, which 
performs the duty of a flower-pot for them. An ability is apparent in the bowl of soil 
that  will  give  shapes  and  forms  which  differ  greatly  from  one  another  to  all  the 
flowers sown in it. If that ability is not attributed to the All-Glorious and All-Powerful 
One,  such  a  situation  could  not  occur  without  there  being  in  the  bowlful  of  soil 
immaterial, different and natural machines for each flower. 

 

240

This  is  because  the  matter  of  which  seeds,  like  sperm  and  eggs  for  example, 
consists is the same. That is, they consist of an orderless, formless, paste-like mixture 
of oxygen,  hydrogen,  carbon  and  nitrogen.  Together  with  this,  since  air,  water,  heat 
and light also are each simple, unconscious and flow against everything in floods, the 
fact that the all-different forms of those flowers emerge from the soil in a most well-
ordered  and  artistic  fashion  self-evidently  and  necessarily  requires  that  there  are 
present in the soil in the bowl immaterial, miniature printing-presses and factories to 
the  number  of  presses  and  factories  in  Europe  so  that  they  could  weave  this  great 
number of living fabrics and thousands of various embroidered textiles. 

So  you  can  see  how  far  the  unbelieving  thought of  the  Naturalists  has  deviated 
from the realm of reason. And although brainless pretenders who imagine nature to be 
creator claim to be men of science and reason, see just how distant  from reason and 
science  is  their  thought,  so  that  they  have  taken  a  superstition  that  is  in  no  way 
possible, that is impossible, as a way for themselves. See this and laugh at them!  

I  f    y  o  u    a  s  k  :  If  such  extraordinary  impossibilities  and  insurmountable 
difficulties  occur  when  beings  are  attributed  to  nature,  how  are  those  difficulties 
removed  when  they  are  attributed  to  the  Single  and  Eternally  Besought  One?  And 
how is the difficult impossibility transformed into that easy necessity? 

T h e  A n s w e r : We saw in the First Impossibility that the manifestation of the 
sun’s reflection displays its radiance and effect through miniature imaginary suns with 
complete ease and lack of trouble in everything from the minutest inanimate particle 
to  the  surface  of  the  vastest  ocean.  If  each  particle’s  relationship  with  the  sun  is 
severed, it  becomes  necessary  to  accept  that  the  external  existence  of  an  actual  sun 
could  subsist,  with a  difficulty  at  the  level  of impossibility,  in  each  of  those  minute 
particles. 

Similarly, if each being is ascribed directly to the Single Eternally Besought One, 
everything necessary  for each being can be conveyed to it through a connection and 
manifestation  with  an  ease  and  facility  that  is  at  the  level  of  necessity.  If  the 
connection is severed and each being reverts from its position as an official to being 
without  duties,  and  is  left  to  nature  and  its  own  devices,  it  becomes  necessary  to 
suppose that, with a hundred thousand difficulties and obstacles that reach the degree 
of impossibility, blind nature possesses within it the power and wisdom to create and 
administer the universe so that it might bring into existence the wonderful machine of 
the being of an animate creature like a fly, which is a tiny index of the universe. This 
is impossible not just once but thousands of times over. 

 

241

I n  S h o r t : Just as it is impossible and precluded for the Necessarily Existent 
One to have any partner or like in respect of His Essence, so too is the interference of 
others in His dominicality and in His creation of beings impossible and precluded.  

As for the difficulties involved in the Second Impossibility, as is proved in many 
parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  if  all  things  are  attributed  to  the  Single  One  of  Unity,  all 
things  become  as  easy  and  trouble-free  as  a  single  thing.  Whereas  if  they  are 
attributed to causes and nature, a single thing becomes as difficult as all things. This 
has been demonstrated with numerous, decisive proofs and a summary of one of them 
is as follows. 

If a man is connected to the king by being a soldier or an official, by reason of the 
strength  of  the  connection  he  may  perform  duties  far  exceeding  his  individual 
strength. He may, on occasion, capture another king in the name of his own king. For 
he himself does not carry the equipment and sources of strength necessary to carry out 
the  duties  and  work  he  performs,  nor  is  he  compelled  to  do  so.  By  reason  of  the 
connection, the king’s treasuries, and the army, which is behind him and is his point 
of support, carry his equipment and sources of strength. That is to say, the duties he 
performs may be as grand as the business of a king, and as tremendous as the actions 
of an army. 

Indeed, through being an official, an ant destroyed Pharaoh’s palace; through the 
connection, a fly killed Nimrod off; and through the connection, the seed of a pine the 
size of a grain of wheat produces all the parts of a huge pine-tree.2 

If the connection is severed and the man discharged from his duties as an official, 
he will be compelled to carry the equipment and sources of strength necessary for his 
work  himself.  He  will  then  only  be  able  to  perform  duties  commensurate  with  the 
sources  of  strength  and  ammunition  he  is  able  to  carry.  If  he  is  required  in  this 
situation to carry out his duties with the extreme ease of the first situation, it will be 
necessary to load on his back the sources of an army’s strength and the arsenals and 
munitions  factories  of  a  king.  Even  clowns  who  invent  stories  and  superstitions  to 
make people laugh would be ashamed at this fanciful idea. 

                                                 

2 Yes, through this connection, the seed receives an order from divine determining and displays 
those wonderful duties. If the connection were to be severed, the creation of the seed would require 
more equipment, power and art than the creation of the mighty pine-tree. For it would be necessary for 
the pine-tree out there on the mountain, which is the work of divine power, to be physically present 
together with all its limbs and parts in what is only the potential tree within the seed and is the work of 
divine determining. For the mighty tree’s factory is the seed. The determined, potential tree within it 
becomes manifest in the external world through divine power and becomes a physical pine-tree. 

 

242

I n  S h o r t : To attribute all beings to the Necessarily Existent One is so easy as 
to  be  necessary,  while  to  attribute  their  creation  to  nature  is  so  difficult  as  to  be 
impossible and outside the realm of reason. 

Third Impossibility 

Nur, explain this impossibility.  

The following two comparisons, which are included in other parts of the Risale-i 

A  wild  savage  entered  a  palace  which  had  been  built  in  an  empty  desert  and 
completed  and  adorned  with  all  the  fruits  of  civilization.  He  cast  an  eye  over  its 
interior  and  saw  thousands  of  well-proportioned  and  artistically  fashioned  objects. 
Out of his boorishness and lack of intelligence, he said: “No one from outside had a 
hand in this, one of the objects from inside must have made this palace together with 
all of its contents,” and he started to investigate. But it did not appear possible even to 
his untaught intelligence that anything he had looked at could have made those things. 
Later, he saw a notebook in which had been written the plan and programme of 
the palace’s construction, an index of its contents and the rules of its administration. 
For sure, the notebook too, which was without hand, eye, or implement, like the rest 
of  the  objects  in  the  palace,  was  completely  lacking  the  ability  to  construct  and 
decorate the palace. But since he saw that in comparison with all the other things, the 
notebook was related to the whole palace by reason of its including all its theoretical 
laws,  he  was  obliged  to  say:  “There,  it  is  this  notebook  that  has  organized, ordered 
and  adorned  the  palace,  and  has  fashioned  all  these  objects  and  set  them  in  their 
places.” He transformed his uncouthness into ludicrous jabber. 

Thus, exactly like this comparison, a boor who subscribed to Naturalist thought, 
which denies God, entered the palace of the universe, which is infinitely more well-
ordered, more perfect and everywhere full of miraculous instances of wisdom than the 
palace in the comparison. Not thinking that it was the work of art of the Necessarily 
Existent  One,  who  is  outside  the  sphere  of  contingency,  and  shunning  that  idea,  he 
saw a collection of the laws of divine practice and an index of dominical art, which 
are  like  a  slate  for  writing  and  erasing  of  divine  determining  in  the    sphere  of 
contingency, and like a constantly changing notebook for the laws of the functioning 
of  divine  power,  and  are  extremely  mistakenly  and  erroneously  given  the  name 
‘nature,’ and he said: 

“These  things  require  a  cause and  nothing  else  appears  to have  the  relationship 
with everything that this notebook has. It is true that reason will in no way accept that 
this  unseeing,  unconscious  and  powerless  notebook  could  carry  out  this  creation, 
which is the work of an absolute dominicality  

 

243

and requires infinite power. But since I do not recognize the Eternal Maker, the most 
plausible explanation is to say the notebook made it, and makes it, so I shall say that.” 
To which we reply: 

You  mistaken  unfortunate!  Your  foolishness  exceeds  anything  imaginable!  Lift 
your head out of the swamp of nature and look beyond yourself! See an All-Glorious 
Maker to whom all beings from particles to planets testify with their different tongues 
and  to  whom  they  point  with  their  fingers!  Behold  the  manifestation  of  the  Pre-
Eternal  Inscriber,  who  fashions  the  palace  and  who  writes  its  programme  in  the 
notebook!  Study  His  decree,  listen  to  the  Qur’an!  Be  delivered  from  your  delirious 
raving! 

Second Comparison: A rustic bumpkin entered the bounds of a splendid palace 
and saw there the uniform actions of an extremely well-disciplined army carrying out 
its drill. He observed a battalion, a regiment and a division stand to attention, stand at 
ease and march, and open fire when commanded as though they were a single private. 
Since his rude, uncultured mind could not comprehend, so denied, that a commander 
had been given command by the country’s laws and by royal decree, he imagined that 
the soldiers were attached to one another with strings. He thought of what wonderful 
string it must be, and was amazed. 

Later, he continued on his way till he came upon a mosque as magnificent as Aya 
Sophia.  He  entered  it  at  the  time  of  Friday  prayer  and  watched  the  congregation  of 
Muslims rising, bowing, prostrating and sitting at the sound of man’s voice. Since he 
did not understand the Shari‘a, which consists of a collection of immaterial, revealed 
laws, nor the immaterial rules proceeding from the Lawgiver’s command, he fancied 
the  congregation  to  be  bound  to  one  another  by  physical  string,  and  that  this 
wonderful  string  had  subjected  them  and  was  making  them  move  like  puppets. 
Coming  up  with  this  idea,  which  is  so  ridiculous  as  to  make  the  most  ignorant  roar 
with laughter, he went on his way. 

Exactly  like  this  comparison,  an  atheist  who  subscribed  to  materialist  thought, 
which  is  denial  and  pure  brutishness,  entered  the  universe,  which  is  a  splendid 
barracks of the Monarch of Pre-Eternity and Post-Eternity for His innumerable forces, 
and a well-ordered mosque of that Pre-Eternal All-Worshipped One. He imagined the 
immaterial laws of the ordering of the universe, which proceed from the Pre-Eternal 
Monarch’s wisdom,  each  to  have  material  and  physical  existence;  and  supposed  the 
theoretical  laws  of  the  sovereignty  of  dominicality,  and  the  rules  and  ordinances  of 
the  Greater  Shari‘a,  the  Shari‘a  of  Creation,  which  are  immaterial  and exist  only  as 
knowledge,  each  to  have  external,  material  and  physical  existence.  But  to  set  up  in 
place of divine power those laws, which proceed from the divine  

 

244

attributes  of  knowledge  and  speech  and  only  exist  as  knowledge,  and  to  attribute 
creation to them; then to attach the name ‘nature’ to them, and to deem force, which is 
merely a manifestation of dominical power, to be an independent almighty possessor 
of  power,  is  a  thousand  times  more  low-fallen  ignorance  than  the  ignorance  in  the 
comparison. 

I n  S h o r t : The imaginary and insubstantial thing that Naturalists call nature, if 
it has an external reality, can at the very most be work of art; it cannot be the Artist. It 
is an  embroidery, and cannot be the Embroiderer. It is a set of decrees; it cannot be 
the  Issuer  of  the  decrees.  It  is  a  body  of  the  laws  of  creation,  and  cannot  be  the 
Lawgiver. It is but a created screen to the dignity of God, and cannot be the Creator. It 
is passive and created, and cannot be a Creative Maker. It is a law, not a power, and 
cannot possess power. It is the recipient, and cannot be the source. 

To  Conclude:  Since  beings  exist,  and  as  was  stated  at  the  beginning  of  this 
treatise, reason cannot think of a way to explain the existence of beings apart from the 
four  mentioned,  three  of  which  were  decisively  proved  through  three  clear 
impossibilities to be invalid and absurd, then necessarily and self-evidently the way of 
divine unity, which  is the  fourth way,  is proved in  a conclusive manner. The fourth 
way, in accordance with the verse quoted at the beginning: 

Is there any doubt about God, Creator of the heavens and the earth? 

demonstrates  clearly  so  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  or  hesitation  the  Divinity  of  the 
Necessarily  Existent  One,  and  that  all  things  issue  directly  from  the  hand  of  His 
power, and that the heavens and the earth are under His sway. 

O  you  unfortunate  worshipper  of  causes  and  nature!  Since  the  nature  of  each 
thing, like all things,  is created, for it is  full of art and is being  constantly renewed, 
and, like the effect, the apparent cause of each thing is also created; and since for each 
thing  to  exist  there  is  need  for much  equipment  and  many  tools;  there  must  exist  a 
Possessor  of  Absolute  Power  who  creates  the  nature  and  brings  the  cause  into 
existence. And that Absolutely Powerful One is in no need of impotent intermediaries 
to  share  in  His  dominicality  and  creation.  God  forbid!  He  creates  cause  and  effect 
together  directly.  In  order  to  demonstrate  His  wisdom  and  the  manifestation  of  His 
names, by establishing an apparent causal relationship and connection through order 
and sequence, He makes causes and nature a veil to the hand of His power so that the 
apparent faults, severities and defects in things should be ascribed to them, and in this 
way His dignity be preserved. 

Is it easier for a watch-maker to make the cog-wheels of a clock, and then arrange 
them  and  put  them  in  order  to  form  the  clock?  Or  is  it  easier  for  him  to  make  a 
wonderful machine in each of the cog-wheels, and then  

 

245

leave  the  making  of  the  clock  to  the  lifeless  hands  of  those  machines?  Is  that  not 
beyond the bounds of possibility? Come on,  you judge with  your unfair reason, and 
say!  

And  is  it  easier  for  a  scribe  to  collect  ink,  pen  and  paper,  and  then using  them 
proceed to write out a book himself? Or is it easier for him to create in the paper, pen 
and ink a writing-machine that requires more art and trouble than the book, and can 
be  used  only  for  that  book,  and  then  tell  the  unconscious  machine:  “Come  on,  you 
write  it!”,  and  himself  not  interfere?  Is  that  not  a hundred times  more difficult  than 
writing it himself? 

I f  y o u  s a y : Yes, it is a hundred times more difficult to create a machine that 
writes a book rather than writing it out oneself. But is it not in a way easier, because 
the machine is a means of producing numerous copies of the same book? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  Through  His  limitless  power,  the  Pre-Eternal  Inscriber 
continuously renews the infinite manifestations of His names so as to display them in 
ever-differing ways. And through this constant renewal, He creates the identities and 
special features in things in such a manner that no missive of the Eternally Besought 
One or dominical book can be the same as any other book. In any case, each will have 
different features in order to express different meanings. 

If you have eyes, look at the human face: you will see that from the time of Adam 
until  today,  indeed,  until  post-eternity,  together  with  the  conformity  of  its  essential 
organs,  each  face  has  a  distinguishing  mark  in  relation  to  all  the  others;  this  is  a 
definite fact. Therefore, each face may be thought of as a different book. Only, for the 
artwork  to  be  set  out,  different  writing-sets,  arrangements,  and  compositions  are 
required.  And  in  order  to  both  collect  and  situate  the  materials,  and  to  include 
everything necessary for the existence of each, a completely different workshop will 
be required. 

Now, knowing it to be impossible, we thought of nature as a printing-press. But 
apart  from  the  composition  and  printing,  which  concern  the  printing-press,  that  is, 
setting  up  the  type  in  a  specific  order,  the  substances  that  form  an  animate  being’s 
body,  the  creation  of  which  is  a  hundred  times  more  difficult  than  that  of  the 
composition  and  ordering,  must  be  created  in  specific  proportions  and  particular 
order, brought from the furthest corners of the cosmos, and placed in the hands of the 
printing-press. But in order to do all these things, there is still need for the power and 
will  of  the  Absolutely  Powerful  One, who  creates  the  printing-press.  That  is  to say, 
this hypothesis of the printing-press is a totally meaningless superstition. 

Thus,  like  the  comparisons  of  the  clock  and  the  book,  the  All-Glorious  Maker, 

who is powerful over all things, has created causes, and so too does  

 

246

He create the effects. Through  His wisdom, He ties the effect to the cause. Through 
His  will,  He  has  determined  a  manifestation  of  the  Greater  Shari‘a,  the  Shari‘a  of 
Creation, which consists of the divine  laws concerning the ordering of all motion  in 
the universe, and determined the nature of beings, which is only to be a mirror to that 
manifestation  in things, and to be a reflection of  it. And through  His power, He has 
created the face of that nature which has received external existence, and has created 
things on that nature, and has mixed them one with the other. 

Is  it  easier  to  accept  this  fact,  which  is  the  conclusion  of  innumerable  most 
rational proofs – in fact, is one not compelled to accept it? – or is it easier to get the 
physical  beings  that  you  call  causes  and  nature,  which  are  lifeless,  unconscious, 
created,  fashioned  and  simple,  to  provide  the  numberless  tools  and  equipment 
necessary  for  the  existence  of  each  thing  and  to  carry  out  those  matters,  which  are 
performed  wisely  and  discerningly?  Is  that  not  utterly  beyond  the  bounds  of 
possibility? We leave it to you to decide, with your unreasonable mind! 

The unbelieving  nature-worshipper replied:  “Since  you are asking me to be fair 
and reasonable, I have to confess that the mistaken way I have followed up to now is 
both a compounded impossibility, and extremely harmful and ugly. Anyone with even 
a grain of intelligence would understand from your analyses above that to attribute the 
act of creation to causes and nature is precluded and impossible, and that to attribute 
all things directly to the Necessarily Existent One is imperative and necessary. I say: 
‘ALL PRAISE BE TO GOD FOR BELIEF,’ and I believe  in Him. Only,  I do have 
one doubt: 

“I  believe  that  Almighty  God  is  the  Creator,  but  what  harm  does  it  do  to  the 
sovereignty of His dominicality if some minor causes have a hand in the creation of 
insignificant matters and thereby gain for themselves a little praise and acclaim? Does 
it diminish His sovereignty in some way?” 

T h e  A n s w e r : As we have conclusively proved in other parts of the Risale-i 
Nur, the mark of rulership is its rejection of interference. The most insignficant ruler 
or official will not tolerate the interference of his own son, even, within the sphere of 
his rule. The fact that, despite being Caliph, certain devout Sultans had their innocent 
sons murdered on the unfounded apprehension that the sons would interfere  in their 
rule  demonstrates  how  fundamental  is  this  law  of  the  rejection  of  interference  in 
rulership.  And  the  law  of  prevention  of  participation,  which  the  independence 
intrinsic  to  rulership  necessitates,  has  shown  its  strength  in  the  history  of  mankind 
through extraordinary upheavals whenever there  have been two governors in a town 
or two kings in a country. 

 

247

If  the  sense  of  rulership  and  sovereignty,  which  is  a  mere  shadow  in  human 
beings, who are impotent and in need of assistance, rejects interference to this degree, 
prevents  the  intervention  of  others,  does  not  accept  participation  in  its  sovereignty, 
and  seeks  to  preserve  the  independence  of  its  position  so  jealously,  if  you  can, 
compare this with an All-Glorious One whose absolute sovereignty is at the degree of 
dominicality,  whose  absolute  rulership  at 
the  degree  of  Divinity,  absolute 
independence  at  the  degree  of  oneness,  and  absolute  lack  of  need  at  the  degree  of 
absolute power, and understand what a necessary requirement and inevitable necessity 
of  that  rulership  is  this  rejection  of  interference,  prevention  of  participation,  and 
repulsion of partners. 

Concerning the second part of your doubt, you said: “If some of the worship of 
some  insignificant  beings  is  directed  towards  certain  causes,  does  this  cause  any 
deficiency  to  the  worship  of  all  beings,  from  particles  to  planets,  which  is  directed 
towards the Necessarily Existent One, the Absolute Object of All Worship?” 

T h e  A n s w e r : The All-Wise Creator of the universe made the universe like 
a tree with conscious beings as its most perfect fruit, and among conscious beings He 
made man its most comprehensive fruit. And man’s most important fruit, indeed the 
result of his creation, the aim of his nature, and the fruit of his life are his thanks and 
worship. Would that Absolute Sovereign  and Independent Ruler, that Single One of 
Unity,  who  creates  the  universe  in  order  to  make  Himself  known  and  loved,  give 
away to others man, the fruit of the whole universe, and man’s thanks  and worship, 
his  most  elevated  fruit?  Totally  contrary  to  His  wisdom,  would  He  make  vain  and 
futile  the  result  of  creation  and  fruit  of  the  universe?  God  forbid!  Would  He  be 
content to give away the worship of creatures to others in a way that would deny His 
wisdom  and  His  dominicality?  And  although  He  demonstrates  through  His  actions 
that  He wishes to make Himself  known and loved to an unlimited degree, would he 
cause His most perfect creatures to forget Him by handing over to causes their thanks 
and gratitude, love and worship, and cause them to deny the exalted purposes in the 
universe? 

O friend who  has  given up the worship of  nature! Now  it  is for  you to say! To 

which he replied: 

“All  praise  be  to  God,  these  two  doubts  of  mine  have  now  been  resolved.  And 
your two proofs concerning divine unity which demonstrate that the only True Object 
of Worship is He, and that nothing other than He is worthy of worship are so brilliant 
and powerful that to deny them would require as much arrogance as to deny the sun 
and the daytime.” 

 

248

Conclusion 

The  person  who  gave  up  atheistic  Naturalism  and  came  to  believe  said:  “All 
praise be to God, I no longer have any doubts, but there are still a few questions about 
which I am curious.” 

FIRST QUESTION 

“We  hear  many  lazy  people  and  those  who  neglect  the  five  daily  prayers  ask: 
‘What  need  has  God  Almighty  of  our  worship  that  in  the  Qur’an  He  severely  and 
insistently reproves those who give up worship and threatens them with so a fearsome 
a  punishment  as  Hell?  How  is  it  in  keeping  with  the  style  of  the  Qur’an,  which  is 
moderate, mild and fair, to demonstrate the ultimate severity towards an insignificant, 
minor fault?” 

T h e  A n s w e r : God Almighty has no need of your worship, nor indeed of 
anything else. It  is  you who needs to worship, for in truth  you are sick. As we have 
proved  in  many  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  worship  is  a  sort  of  remedy  for  your 
spiritual  wounds.  You  can  understand  how  absurd  it  would  be  if  an  ill  person 
responds to a kindly doctor who insists on his taking medicines that are beneficial for 
his  condition  by  saying:  “What  need do  you  have  of  it  that  you are  insisting  in  this 
way?” 

As for the severe threats and fearsome punishments in the Qur’an concerning the 
giving  up  of  worship,  they  may  be  likened  to  a  king  who  in  order  to  protect  his 
subjects’ rights, inflicts a severe punishment on an ordinary man in accordance with 
the degree that his crime infringes those rights. 

In the same way, the man who gives up worship and ritual prayer is violating in a 
significant manner the rights of beings, who are like the  subjects of the Monarch of 
Pre-Eternity  and  Post-Eternity,  and  is  in  fact  acting  unjustly  towards  them.  For  the 
perfections of beings are manifested through the glorification and worship performed 
by that aspect of them which is directed towards their Maker. The one who abandons 
worship  does  not  and  cannot  see  this  worship.  Indeed,  he  denies  it.  Furthermore, 
beings  occupy  an  exalted  position  by  reason  of  their  worship  and  glorification,  and 
each is a missive of the Eternally Besought One, and a mirror to its Sustainer’s names. 
Since  he  reduces  them  from  their  high  positions  and  considers  them  to  be 
unimportant,  lifeless,  aimless,  and  without duties,  he  is  insulting  them,  and denying 
and transgressing their perfections. 

Indeed, everyone sees the world in his own mirror. God Almighty  

 

249

created man as a measure and scale for the universe. And from the world He gave a 
particular world to each person. This world He colours for him in accordance with his 
sincere beliefs. For example, a despairing, lamenting, weeping person sees beings as 
weeping and in despair, while a cheerful, optimistic, merry person sees the universe 
as  joyful  and  smiling.  A  reflective  man  given  to  solemn  worship  and  glorification 
discovers and sees to a degree the certain, truly existent worship and glorification of 
beings,  while  a  person  who  abandons  worship  through  either  neglect  or  denial  sees 
beings in a manner totally contrary and opposed to the reality of their perfections and 
so transgresses their rights. 

Furthermore,  since  the  person  who  gives  up  prayer  does  not  own  himself,  he 
wrongs  his  own  soul,  which  is  a  slave  of  its  True  Owner.  His  Owner  delivers 
awesome threats in order to protect His slave’s rights from his evil-commanding soul. 
Also, since he has given up worship, which is the result of his creation and the aim of 
his  nature,  it  is  like  an act  of  aggression  against  divine  wisdom  and dominical  will, 
and he therefore receives punishment. 

I n  S h o r t : The abandoner of worship both wrongs his own soul, which is the 
slave and totally owned property of Almighty God, and wrongs and transgresses the 
rights  of  the  perfections  of  the  universe.  Certainly,  just  as  unbelief  is  an  insult  to 
beings, so is the abandonment of worship a denial of the universe’s perfections. And 
since  it  is  an  act  of  aggression  against  divine  wisdom,  it  is  deserving  of  awesome 
threats and severe punishment. 

Thus,  it  is  to  express  this  deservedness  and  the  above  facts  that  the  Qur’an  of 
Miraculous  Exposition  chooses  in  a  miraculous  way  that  severe  style,  which,  in 
complete  conformity  with 
the 
requirements of the situation. 

the  principles  of  eloquence,  corresponds 

to 

SECOND QUESTION 

The person who had given up Naturalism and come to believe next asked: 
“It  is  indeed  a  vast  truth  that  each  being  is  dependent  on  divine  will  and 
dominical  power  in  every  aspect;  in  all  of  its  functions,  qualities  and  actions.  Our 
narrow minds cannot comprehend this because of its  vastness. However, the infinite 
abundance  that  we  see  around  us,  and  the  boundless  ease  in  the  creation  and 
formation of things, and the infinite ease and facility in the way of unity, which was 
established through your proofs above, and the infinite ease that verses of the Qur’an 
like the following clearly demonstrate and expound, 

250

Your creation and resurrection is as a single soul,(31:28) 

 

and, 

The  matter  of  the  Hour  shall  be  but  as  the  twinkling  of  the  eye,  or  even 
closer(16:77) 

show this mighty truth to be a matter that is most acceptable and rational. What is the 
wisdom and secret of this ease?” 

T  h  e    A n  s  w  e  r  :  This  matter  was  elucidated  in  a  most  clear,  decisive  and 
convincing fashion in the explanation of “And He is powerful over all things,” which 
forms the Tenth Phrase of the Twentieth Letter. And it was demonstrated even more 
clearly  in  the  Addendum  to  that  letter  that  when  attributed to  the  Single  Maker,  all 
beings become as easy as a single being. If they are not attributed to that Single One 
of  Unity,  the  creation  of  a  single  creature becomes as  difficult  as  that  of all  beings, 
and a seed as problematical as a tree. When they are ascribed to their True Maker, the 
universe becomes as easy and trouble-free as a tree, a tree as easy as a seed, Paradise 
as  easy  as  the  spring,  and  the  spring  as  easy  as  a  flower.  We  shall  now  point  out 
briefly one or two evidences that  have been explained in detail in other parts of the 
Risale-i  Nur  out  of  the  hundreds  which  explain  the  underlying  reasons  for  and 
instances  of  wisdom  in  the  conspicuous,  boundless  abundance  and  profusion  of 
beings, the ease of the  great number of individuals in each species, and the fact that 
well-ordered,  artistically  fashioned  and  valuable  beings  come  into  existence  with 
immense speed and ease. 

For example, if the command of a hundred soldiers is given to one officer, it is a 
hundred  times  easier  than  if  the  command  of  one  soldier  is  given  to  a  hundred 
officers.  And  if  to  equip  an  army  it  is  assigned  to  one  headquarters,  one  law,  one 
factory and the command of one king, it quite simply becomes as easy as equipping a 
single  soldier.  In  the  same  way,  if  to  equip  one  soldier  it  is  referred  to  numerous 
headquarters, numerous factories and numerous commanders, it becomes as difficult 
as equipping an army. Because in order to equip a single soldier, it would require as 
many factories as are necessary for a whole army. 

Again, since by reason of the mystery of unity, the vital necessities of a tree are 
provided through one root, one centre and according to one law, it produces thousands 
of fruits as easily as a single fruit. This is plain to see. If unity changes to multiplicity 
and  all  the  necessities  vital  for  each  fruit  are  provided  from  different  places,  to 
produce each fruit becomes as difficult as to produce the tree. And to produce a single 
seed, even, which is a sample and index of the tree, becomes as difficult as the tree. 
Because all the necessities vital for the tree’s life are necessary for the seed. 

 

251

There  are  hundreds  of  examples  like  these  which  show  that  it  is  easier  for 
thousands of  beings  to  come  into  existence  through  unity  than  for  a  single  being  to 
come  into  existence  through  multiplicity  and  ascribing  partners  to  God.  Since  this 
truth  has  been  proved  with  absolute  certainty  in  other  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  we 
refer you to them and here only explain an important reason for this ease and facility 
from  the  point  of  view  of  divine  knowledge,  divine  determining,  and  dominical 
power. It is as follows: 

You are a being. If you attribute yourself to the Pre-Eternal All-Powerful One, He 
creates you at a command through His infinite power out of nothing in an instant, like 
striking a match. If you do not do this and rather attribute yourself to physical causes 
and nature, since you are a well-ordered summary, fruit, and miniature index and list 
of the universe, in order to make  you, it would be necessary to sift with a fine sieve 
the universe and its elements, and to gather in precise measure from all the corners of 
the universe the substances of which your body is composed. For physical causes only 
gather and join together. It  is confirmed by people of reason that they cannot create 
out  of  nothing  what  is  not  present  in  them.  Since  this  is  the  case,  they  would  be 
compelled to collect together the body of a tiny animate being from every corner of 
the cosmos.  

Now understand what ease there is in unity, divine unity, and what difficulties lie 

in misguidance and attributing partners to God! 

Secondly, there is an infinite ease also with regard to divine knowledge. It is like 
this: divine determining is an aspect of divine knowledge; it determines a measure for 
each thing, which is like its particular and immaterial mould; the determined measure 
is like a plan or model  for the thing’s being. When divine power creates, it does so 
with  extreme  ease  in  accordance  with  the  determined  measure.  If  the  thing  is  not 
attributed  to  the  All-Powerful  One  of  Glory,  who  possesses  all-embracing,  infinite 
and pre-eternal knowledge, as was described above, not only thousands of difficulties 
appear, but hundreds of impossibilities. For if it were not for the determined measure 
which  exists  in  divine  knowledge,  thousands  of  material  moulds  with  external 
existences would have to be employed in the body of even a tiny animate being. 

So, understand one reason for the infinite ease in unity and the endless difficulties 
in misguidance and ascribing partners to God. Realize what a veracious, correct, and 
exalted truth is stated by the verse, 

The  matter  of  the  Hour  shall  be  but  as  the  twinkling  of  the  eye,  or  even 
closer. 

 

252

THIRD QUESTION 

The former enemy and now rightly-guided friend then asked: “Philosophers, who 
have  made  many  advances  these  days,  claim  that  nothing  is  created  out  of  nothing, 
and  nothing  is  annihilated  and  goes  to  nothing;  there  is  only  compostion  and 
decomposition, and this makes the factory of the universe run. Is this correct?” 

T h e  A n s w e r : Since the most advanced philosophers who did not consider 
beings  in  the  light  of  the  Qur’an  saw  that  the  formation  and  existence  of  beings  by 
means  of  nature  and  causes  was  so  difficult  as  to  be  impossible  –  in  the  manner 
proved above, they diverged into two groups.  

One  group  became  Sophists;  abdicating  reason,  which  is  exclusive  to  human 
beings,  and  falling  lower  than  mindless  beasts,  they  found  it  easier  to  deny  the 
universe’s  existence  and  even  their  own  existences,  than  to  follow  the  way  of 
misguidance,  which  claims  that  causes  and  nature  have  the  power  to  create.  They 
therefore  denied  both  themselves  and  the  universe  and  descended  into  absolute 
ignorance. 

The second group saw that in misguidance, according to which causes and nature 
are creator, the creation of a fly or a seed, even,  entails  innumerable difficulties and 
requires a power unacceptable to reason. They were therefore compelled to deny the 
act  of  creation  and  to  say:  “Nothing  can  exist  out  of  nothing.”  Seeing  total 
annihiliation also to be impossible, they declared: “What exists cannot go to nothing.” 
They  fancied  an  imaginary  situation  in  which  combining  and  decomposition, 
gathering together and dispersion, occur through the motion of particles and the winds 
of chance. 

Now, see! Those who consider themselves to be the most intelligent are the most 
profoundly ignorant and stupid. Understand just how ludicrous, debased, and ignorant 
misguidance makes man, and take a lesson! 

Indeed, a Pre-Eternal Power created the heavens and the earth in six days, every 
year  creates  four  hundred  thousand  species  simultaneously  on  the  face  of  the  earth, 
and in six weeks every spring constructs a living world more full of art and wisdom 
than the world itself. Thus, it is more foolish and ignorant than the Sophists, the first 
group above, to deny the act of creation and deem it unlikely that, like a chemical that 
when  applied  shows  up  invisible  writing,  Pre-Eternal  Power  should  give  external 
existence  to  beings,  which,  though  externally  non-existent,  exist  as  knowledge,  and 
whose plans and measures are determined in the realm of a Pre-Eternal Knowledge. 

Those  unfortunates  are  absolutely  impotent  and  have  nothing  at  their  disposal 

apart from the faculty of will. Although they are inflated like  

 

253

Pharaohs, they can neither annihilate anything nor create anything from nothing, even 
a minute particle. And so, although nothing comes into existence out of nothing at the 
hand of causes and nature on which they rely, out of their stupidity they say: “Nothing 
comes  from  non-being,  and  nothing  goes  to  non-being.”  And  they  even  extend  this 
absurd and erroneous principle to the Absolutely All-Powerful One. 

Indeed, the All-Powerful One of Glory has two ways of creating:  
The  First  is  through  origination  and  invention.  That  is,  He  brings  a  being  into 
existence out of nothing, out of non-existence, and creates everything necessary for it, 
also out of nothing, and places those necessities in its hand. 

The Second is through composition, through art. That is, He forms certain beings 
out  of  the  elements  of  the  universe  in  order  to  demonstrate  subtle  instances  of 
wisdom, such as displaying the perfections of His wisdom and the manifestations of 
many  of  His  names.  Through  the  law  of  providing,  he  sends  particles  and  matter, 
which  are dependent  on  His  command,  to  these  beings  and  employs  the  particles  in 
them. 

Yes,  the  Absolutely  All-Powerful  One  creates  in  two  ways:  He  both  originates 
and He composes. To annihilate what exists and to make exist what does not exist is 
most simple and easy for Him. It is one of His constant and universal laws. The man, 
therefore, who says: “He cannot give existence to what does not exist” in the face of a 
power that in one spring makes exist out of nothing the forms and attributes of three 
hundred  thousand  animate  creatures,  and, besides their  particles,  all  their  conditions 
and states, such a man should himself be obliterated! 

The person who gave up nature and embraced the truth said: “Praise and thanks 
be  to  God  Almighty  to  the  number  of  particles  in  existence  for  I  have  attained  to 
complete  belief.  I  have  been  saved  from  delusion  and  misguidance.  Not  one  of  my 
doubts remains. 

“ALL  PRAISE  BE  TO  GOD  FOR  THE  RELIGION  OF  ISLAM,  AND 

COMPLETE AND PERFECT BELIEF!” 

All  glory  be  unto  You!  We  have  no  knowledge  save  that  which  You  have 
taught us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)                                                                    

                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

254

The Twenty-Fourth Flash 

On Islamic Dress for Women 

[While  being  the  Second  and  Third  Matters  of  the  Fifteenth 
Note, this treatise was made the Twenty-Fourth Flash because 
of its importance.] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
O  Prophet!  Tell  your  wives  and  daughters,  and  the  believing  women,  that 
they should cast their outer garments over their persons [when abroad] [to 
the end of the verse].(33:59) 

This verse enjoins the veiling of women. However, dissolute civilization opposes 
this command of the Qur’an; it does not consider the veiling of women to be natural 
and says it is slavery of a sort.1 

T h e  A n s w e r : We shall explain only four of the many instances of wisdom 
in  this  injunction  of  the  Qur’an,  showing  that  it  is  entirely  natural  and  those  who 
oppose it are opposing the innate disposition of women. 

FIRST INSTANCE OF WISDOM 

To veil themselves is natural for women and their innate dispositions demand it. 
For women are weak and delicate, and since they  are  in  need of a man’s protection 
and help for themselves and for their children whom  

                                                 

1 Part of my defence for the Appeal Court, which opposed the [Eskişehir] Court and silenced it: “I 
say to this court of law that if there is justice on the face of the earth, it will surely quash the decision to 
convict a person who has expounded a most sacred, true, and right divine principle which has been in 
force in the social life of three hundred and fifty million people every century for one thousand three 
hundred and fifty years, relying on the confirmation and unanimity of three hundred and fifty thousand 
Qur’anic commentaries and following the beliefs of our forefathers for one thousand three hundred and 
fifty years; it will surely quash such a ruling!” 

 

255

they  love  more  than  their  own  lives,  they  have  a  natural desire  to  make  themselves 
loved and not loathed, and not to be rebuffed. 

Also, seven out of ten women are either old or ugly and they do not want to show 
their  age  or unsightliness to  everyone.  Or  they  are  jealous,  and  they  do  not  want  to 
appear  ugly  in  relation  to  others  who  are  more  beautiful.  Or  they  are  frightened  of 
assault  or  aspersions,  and  want  by  nature  to  cover  themselves  so  as  not  to  suffer 
assault, nor to be accused of unfaithfulness by their husbands. If noted carefully, it is 
seen that it  is the elderly who hide themselves most. While only two or three out of 
ten women are both young and beautiful and do not feel uncomfortable at displaying 
themselves. 

It is clear that people are discomforted at being looked at by people they do not 
like  or  find  tedious;  they  are  upset  by  it.  If  a  beautiful  immodestly  dressed  woman 
takes pleasure at two or three out of ten men who are canonically strangers looking at 
her, she is bored by the seven or eight. Also, since a woman with uncorrupted morals 
is  sensitive  and easily  affected,  she  will  certainly  be distressed  at  dirty  looks whose 
effects have been physically experienced, indeed, are poisonous. We even hear that in 
Europe,  the  place  of  open  dress,  many  women  are  fed  up  at  being  the  object  of 
attention,  and  complain  to  the  police,  saying:  “These  brutes  keep  staring  at  us  and 
disturbing us.” This means that present-day civilization’s unveiling women is contrary 
to their natures, while the Qur’an’s command to veil themselves is both inconformity 
with  women’s  natures,  and  saves  them  –  those  mines  of  compassion  who  may  be 
worthy companions for all eternity – from degeneration, degradation, what is in effect 
slavery and wretchedness. 

Furthermore,  by  nature  women  are  fearful  of  men  who  are  strangers,  and  are 
anxious  at  them.  Fear  naturally  demands  the  veiling  of  women.  For  in  addition  to 
suffering the difficulty of bearing the load of a child for eight or nine months, which 
certainly  embitters  the  eight  or  nine  minutes’  pleasure,  there  is  the  possibility  of 
suffering the calamity of bringing up a child for eight or nine years without protector. 
Since this  happens frequently, by creation they truly fear strange men and by nature 
want to hide themselves from them. Being weak, their creation demands that through 
veiling  themselves  they  do  not  excite  the  appetites  of  men  outside  the  stipulated 
degrees  of  kinship,  nor  allow  any  opportunity  for  assault;  their  weak  creation  gives 
powerful warning. It shows that their cloaks and coats are shields and fortresses. The 
fact that, according to news received, the bare-legged wife of a high-ranking man in 
the  world  was  accosted  in  the  country’s  capital,  in  the  market-place  in  daylight  in 
front  of  everyone  by  a  common  shoe-shiner,  deals  a  slap  in  the  shameless  faces  of 
those opposed to the veiling of women! 

 

256

SECOND INSTANCE OF WISDOM 

The  geniune,  intense  relationship, love,  and  affection between  men  and  women 
do not arise only from the needs of worldly life. Yes, a woman is a companion to her 
husband not only  in this worldly  life, she  is his companion  in eternal  life too. Since 
she will be her husband’s companion in eternal life, she surely should not attract the 
looks of others besides her husband, her everlasting friend and companion, and should 
not  offend  him  and  make  him  jealous.  In  consequence  of  the  mystery  of  belief,  her 
believing  husband’s  relations  with  her  are  not  confined  to  this  worldly  life  and  his 
love  is  not  only  animal  and  temporary,  so  long  as  her  beauty  lasts;  he  holds  true, 
earnest love and respect for her because she will be his companion in eternal life. And 
he bears that love and respect for her, not only during her youth when she is beautiful, 
but also when she  is old and unsightly. Certainly  in return for this, she should show 
her beauties to him alone and restrict her love to him; this is demanded by humanity. 
Otherwise she would gain very little and lose much. 

According to the Shari‘a, the husband should be a good match for the wife. That 
is, they should be suitable to one another. The most important aspect of this is with a 
view to religion. 

Happy  the  husband  who  sees  the  wife’s  firm  religion  and  follows  her,  and 

himself becomes pious in order not to lose his companion of eternal life. 

Happy the wife who sees  her husband’s firmness in religion and becomes pious 

so as not to lose her eternal friend. 

Alas  for  the  man  who  becomes  dissolute,  which  will  lose  him  for  ever  that 

righteous woman. 

blessed friend. 

Alas for the woman who does not follow her pious husband and loses her eternal 

And a thousand woes on the unhappy husband and wife who imitate each other in 

sin and vice, helping one another to enter Hell-fire! 

THIRD INSTANCE OF WISDOM 

Happy  family  life  is  perpetuated  through  mutual  confidence  between  husband 
and wife, and heartfelt respect and love. Immodest dress and free-and-easy behaviour 
destroy the confidence, and spoil the mutual respect and love. For out of ten women 
who favour immodest dress only one will  not try to make  herself  liked by  strangers 
because she does not find other men more attractive than her husband. Nine will find 
others better than their husbands. And only one out of twenty men will not find other 
women  

 

257

more  attractive.  Then  besides  the  true  love  and  mutual respect  disappearing,  it  may 
arouse extremely ugly and base feelings, as follows: 

By nature, men do not feel any lust towards those within the stipulated degrees of 
kinship like their sisters, because, since such relatives’ faces induce kindness and licit 
love  due  to  their  close  kinship,  it  nullifies  any  sexual  or  lusty  inclinations.  But  to 
leave uncovered parts of the body which according to the Shari‘a it is not permissible 
to expose to close relatives like the legs, may awaken extremely ugly feelings in men 
of  low  character.  For  the  face  of  a  close  relative  reminds  the  man  of  their  close 
kinship and does not resemble the face of someone outside the degrees of kinship, but 
a  bare  leg  is  the  same  as  that  of  canonical  strangers.  The  leg  does  bear  any 
distinguishing  mark  to  recall  the  close  kinship  of  its  owner,  so  may  arouse  carnal 
feelings  in  the  man.  To  look  on  such  things  is  so degenerate  as  to  make  one’s  hair 
stand on end. 

FOURTH INSTANCE OF WISDOM 

It is clear that everyone wants lots of children. There is no nation or government 
that does not support an increase in population. In fact, God’s Most Noble Messenger 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) said: “Marry and increase, for at the Last Day I 
shall  take  pride in  your  large  numbers.”2  However,  the abandoning of  Islamic  dress 
for women does not increase marriage, it decreases it significantly. For even the most 
lay-about and modern youth wants his wife to be chaste. He does not want her to be 
modern, that is, careless in questions of dress and morals like himself, and so remains 
single, and even frequents prostitutes. 

Women  are  not  like  that,  they  cannot  restrict  their  husbands’  behaviour  to  the 
same  extent.  Women’s  most  basic  characteristics  are  loyalty  and  trustworthiness, 
since being the director of all the matters to do with the home, the woman is charged 
with  protecting  and  preserving  her  husband’s  property  and  possessions,  and  his 
children.  Carelessness  in  dress  and  morality  destroys  that  loyalty,  and  her  husband 
loses confidence in her and makes her suffer pangs of conscience. In fact, if the two 
qualities of courage and generosity, which are desirable in men, are found in women, 
it  damages  this  loyalty  and  confidence  and  so  are  undesirable  for  women  and  are 
considered  to  be  bad  qualities.  But  since  the  husband’s  duty  is  not  loyalty  and 
stewardship, but protection, kindness, and respect, he cannot be restricted and refined, 
and may marry other women as well. 

                                                 

Jami‘ al-Saghir, No: 3366. 

2 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, iii, 269, No: 3366; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, No: 1021; al-Suyuti,  

 

258

Our  country  cannot  be  compared  with  Europe,  because  there  honour  may  be 
preserved to a degree by violent means such as the duel, despite immodest dress. The 
person who makes eyes at the wife of a self-respecting man takes his life in his hands, 
and then looks. Also the people of Europe are cold and frigid, like the climate. Asia, 
that is, the lands of Islam, are relatively torrid. It is well-known that the environment 
has  an  effect  on  people’s  morality.  Perhaps  in  those  cold  countries  immodest  dress 
does  not  stimulate  the  animal  appetites  and  carnal  desires  of  those  cold people,  and 
lead to abuse. But the carnal lusts of the easily influenced and sensitive people of hot 
countries are continually excited by immodest dress, which is thus the cause of much 
abuse and waste and the weakening of the young generation, and the loss of strength. 
Instead of answering natural needs one a month or every three weeks or so, a person 
considers it necessary every few days. And then, since he is obliged to avoid his wife 
for  perhaps  two  weeks  out  of  every  month  due  to  contingencies  like  her  monthly 
period, if he is defeated by his appetites, he will incline to houses of ill-fame. 

The veiling of women may not be abolished on the pretext of the women of small 
towns  and  villages  and  nomad  women,  for  innocent  working-women  and  somewhat 
coarse women being partially unveilled does not excite carnal desires since it is due to 
their  working  to  secure  their  livelihoods  and  their  physical,  wearying  labour. 
Moreover, since idle, lay-about men are few, and not even one in ten of the immoral 
men  of  the  large  towns  can  be  found  among  them.  Such  a  comparison  should  not 
therefore be made. 

 

259

In His Name, be He glorified! 

A Conversation with the Women, 
My Believing Sisters of the hereafter 

At  the  time  I  returned  to  blessed  Isparta,  which  bears  the  meaning  of  the 
Medresetü’z-Zehra,1 for the third time, I had seen the sincere and enthusiastic interest 
shown by women towards the Risale-i Nur in some other provinces, and had realized 
that in a way far exceeding my due they had confidence in my instruction in it. I heard 
then  that  the  women  in  Isparta,  my  blessed  sisters  of  the  hereafter,  were  waiting  to 
receive instruction from me, as though I were going to instruct them in mosques in the 
manner of preaching. I was ill with five or so different illnesses, in a wretched state, 
lacking the strength to speak and think,  yet that night the following was imparted to 
my heart, impellingly: “Fifteen years ago you wrote A Guide for Youth at the request 
of some youths and it was a source of benefit for many. Women, however, are in even 
greater  need  of  a  guide  at  this  time.”  Despite  my  extreme  weakness,  wretchedness, 
and powerlessness, in the face of this warning I wrote very concisely in three points a 
number  of  necessary  matters  which  I  now  explain  to  my  blessed  sisters  and  young 
spiritual offspring. 

FIRST POINT 

Since  one  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  is  compassion  and 
women are champions of compassion, they are by nature more closely connected with 
the Risale-i Nur than others. Praise be to God, this  natural sympathy  is  felt in many 
places.  The  self-sacrifice  within  such  compassion  seeks  nothing  in  return  and 
expresses true sincerity, and so is of the greatest importance at this time.  

Yes,  the  fact  that  wanting  nothing  in  return,  a  mother  will  sacrifice  her  life  to 
save  her  young  from  danger,  as  demanded  by  her  nature  and  with  true  sincerity, 
shows  that  women  are  capable  of  great  heroism.  By  developing  this  heroism,  they 
may save their lives both in this world and in the hereafter. However, this important 
attribute does not unfold under the influence of certain bad currents of thought, or else 
it is exploited. A small example out of hundreds is as follows: 

                                                 

1 For the Medresetü’z-Zehra, See note 21, page 325. 

 

260

A compassionate mother undertakes every sort of self-sacrifice so that her child 
should not fall into danger in this worldly life and should receive every sort of benefit 
and advantage; she brings him up with this in view. Thinking, “My son is going to be 
a Pasha,” she gives him all her property, takes him from the Qur’an school and sends 
him to Europe. But it does not occur to her that her child’s eternal life has fallen into 
danger.  She  tries  to  save  him  from  prison  in  this  world  and  does  not  take  into 
consideration  his  being  sentenced  to  the  prison  of  Hell.  Reversing  that  innate 
compassion,  she  makes  her  innocent  child  a  claimant  against  her  in  the  hereafter, 
though  he  should  be  her  intercessor.  He  will  rebuke  her  saying:  “Why  did  you  not 
strengthen my belief and so cause me to be lost?” In this world too, since he did not 
receive  a  proper  Islamic  upbringing,  he  cannot  respond  to  his  mother’s  wondrous 
compassion in the way it deserves; in fact he does so very deficiently. 

If  she  does  not  misdirect  her  true  compassion  and  works  to  save  her  unhappy 
child  from  everlasting  incarceration  in  Hell  and  from  dying  while  in  misguidance, 
which  will  result  in  eternal  extinction,  the  equivalent  of  each  of  the  child’s  good 
works  will  pass  to  the  mother’s  book  of  good  deeds.  And  after  her  death  he  will 
continuously send lights to her spirit with his good works, and in the hereafter, will be 
not a claimant but with all his spirit and life an intercessor for her, and a blessed child 
of her’s for all eternity. 

Yes, man’s first master and most influential teacher is his mother. In connection 
with this, I shall explain the following to you, which I have always felt strongly in my 
own self: 

I am eighty years old and have received lessons from eighty thousand people. Yet 
I  swear  that  the  truest  and  most  unshakeable  lessons  I  have  received  are  those 
inculcated in me by my late mother, which have always remained fresh for me. They 
have  been  planted  in  my  nature  as  though  they  were  seeds  planted  in  my  physical 
being. I observe that other instruction has been constructed on those seeds. That is to 
say, the lessons instilled in my  nature and spirit by my mother when I was one  year 
old I now see at the age of eighty to be fundamental seeds amid great truths. 

For instance, I consider it certain that I learnt from the compassionate behaviour 
and acts of my mother and from her teaching, to be compassionate, which is the most 
important of the four principles of my way, and to be kind and clement, which is the 
greatest truth of the Risale-i Nur. Yes, the compassion of motherhood comprises true 
sincerity and true self-sacrifice, but it is a misuse of it to not think of the hereafter – a 
treasury of diamonds for her innocent child – and to turn his face towards this world, 
which  

 

261

resembles temporary, transient fragments of glass, and to be kind to him in that way, 
is to misuse that compassion. 

A  proof  of  this  heroism  of  women  in  respect  of  compassion,  which  wants 
absolutely  no  recompense  and  nothing  in  return,  and  of  their  sacrificing  their  very 
spirits, which in no way seeks personal benefit and no show, is that a hen, which bears 
a tiny sample of that compassion, will attack a lion and sacrifice its life for its chicks. 
Now,  sincerity  is  the  most  valuable  and  most  essential  principle  in  Islamic 
training  and  in  deeds  pertaining  to  the  hereafter.  True  sincerity  is  present  in  the 
heroism  of  this  kind  of  compassion.  If  these  two  points  begin  to  develop  among 
women,  it  will  lead  to  considerable  happiness  within  the  domain  of  Islam.  When  it 
comes  to  the  heroism  of  men,  it  can  never  be  for  nothing;  they  always  want 
recompense in perhaps a hundred ways. At the very least they want glory and renown. 
But regretably, unfortunate women practise hypocrisy in another form in order to be 
saved from the evil and oppression of tyrannical men; this sort arises from weakness 
and impotence. 

SECOND POINT 

This year, although I had withdrawn from the life of society and was in seclusion, 
I looked at the world for the sake of some of my brothers and sisters who were Risale-
i Nur students. I heard from most of the friends who visited me complaints about their 
family  lives. “Alas!”, I said, “Family  life  is the refuge of people, and particularly of 
Muslims, and a sort of Paradise, and a small world. Has this now started to break up 
as  well?”  I  sought  the  reason  and  I  understood  that  one  or  two  covert  groups  were 
working to mislead the youth and drive the  young to vice by exciting their appetites, 
so as to cause harm to Islamic social life and thereby to the religion of Islam. I also 
realized  that  one  or  two  groups  were  working  covertly  and  effectively  to  drive 
neglectful women down the wrong road. I understood too that a severe blow would be 
dealt  to  this  Muslim  nation  from  that  quarter.  I  therefore  categorically  state  the 
following to you my sisters and spiritual children: 

The sole means of saving women’s happiness in the hereafter, and their happiness 
in this world, as well as saving their elevated innate qualities from corruption, is the 
training  given by the religion of  Islam; there  is  no other means. You hear about the 
situation into which the unfortunate women of Russia have fallen. It says in one part 
of the Risale-i Nur that no sensible man builds love and affection for his wife on her 
fleeting, superficial beauty of five to ten years; he should build it on her fine conduct, 
the  

 

262

most  permanent  and  best  of  beauty,  which  is  particular  to  womanhood  and  its 
compassion. Then, when the unfortunate advances in years, her husband’s love for her 
will  persist.  For  his  wife  is  not  merely  a  temporary  helper  and  companion  in  this 
worldly  life,  but  an  eternal, lovable  companion  in  everlasting  life,  so  the  older  they 
grow  their  love  for  each  other  should  also  grow,  and  their  compassion  and  respect. 
Under the guise of culture and civilization, family  life  is  now is a temporary animal 
relationship  followed  by  eternal  separation,  and  is  being  destroyed  at  its  very 
foundations. 

In another place in the Risale-i Nur it says: “Happy the man who in order not to 
lose  his  companion  of  eternity,  copies  his  righteous  wife  and  so  becomes  righteous 
himself.  And  happy  the  woman  who,  seeing  her  husband  to  be  pious,  adheres  to 
religion herself so as not to lose her everlasting friend and companion. Unhappy the 
man who follows  his wife in sin, does not try to  make  her  give it up, but joins  her. 
And  unhappy  the  woman  who,  seeing  her  husband’s  sinfulness,  follows  him  in 
another way. And alas  for the wife and husband who assist one another in throwing 
each other into the Fire. That is, who encourage one another to embrace the evils of 
civilization.” 

These lines have the following meaning: at this time, Islamic conduct within the 
bounds  of  the  Shari‘a  is  the  only  means  of  developing  family  life  and  finding 
happiness in this world and the hereafter, and causing the elevated qualities of women 
to unfold. Now, the most important matter in family life is this, that if the woman sees 
bad conduct and disloyalty in her husband and to spite him, stints in her loyalty and 
faithfulness  to  him,  which  is  her  duty  as  far  as  the  family  is  concerned,  then  the 
factory of that family life will be thrown into confusion, exactly like discipline in the 
army being spoilt. The woman should try to reform her husband’s faults as far as she 
can  in  order to  save  her  companion of  eternity.  It  is  harmful  in  every  respect  if  she 
starts to show herself to others by unveiling herself and tries to make herself attractive 
to others. For a woman who gives up complete loyalty pays the penalty in this world 
too. Because it is her nature to be fearful and upset at the looks of those canonically 
strangers to her, and to avoid them. She is discomforted at the looks of eighteen out of 
twenty strangers. As for men, they are discomforted and upset at the looks of only one 
out of a hundred women who are canonically strangers to them. The woman  suffers 
torment  in  that  respect,  and  so  too  may  be  accused  of  disloyalty,  and  due  to  her 
weakness, will be unable to defend her rights. 

In  Short:  Just  as  in  respect  of  compassion  women  do  not  resemble  men  in 

heroism and sincerity, and men cannot compare with them in that  

 

263

regard;  so  too  innocent  women  can  in  no  way  compare  with  men  in  vice.  For  this 
reason by their  natures and weakness, they are truly frightened of strangers and feel 
themselves  compelled to conceal themselves beneath their abundant outer garments. 
For if for eight minutes’ pleasure a man commits sin, he only suffers a loss of eight 
liras. But as the penalty of the pleasure of eight minutes’ sin, in this world the woman 
bears  a  heavy  load  for  eight  months  and  then  has  the  hardship  of  rearing  the 
unprotected child for eight years. She therefore cannot compete with men in vice and 
pays a penalty a hundred times greater. 

The  not  infrequent  incidents  of  this sort  show that  just as  by  nature  women  are 
the  source  of  elevated  morals,  so  do  they  virtually  lack  the  capacity  for  worldly 
pleasure  in  vice  and  dissipation.  That  is  to  say,  they  are  a  type  of  blessed  creature 
created to pass happy lives in the family within the bounds laid down by Islam. God 
damn  those  covert  groups  who  are  corrupting  these  blessed  creatures!  And  may 
Almighty God preserve my sisters from the evil of such dissolute wretches. 

My sisters! I have this to say to you confidentially: rather than entering under the 
domination  of  a  dissolute,  immoral,  Westernized  husband  due  to  straitened 
circumstances, try to economize and obtain your own livelihood like innocent peasant 
women with the frugality and contentment which is in your natures; do not try to sell 
yourselves. If it is your fate to have a husband who is unsuitable for you, be content 
with  your  fate  and  resigned  to  it.  God  willing,  he  will  be  reformed  through  your 
contentment  and  resignation.  But  to  apply to  the  courts  for  a divorce,  which  I  have 
heard  of  recently;  that  is  not  in  keeping  with  the  honour  of  Islam  and  this  nation’s 
good name! 

THIRD POINT 

My  dear  sisters,  you  should  be  certain  that  as  is  demonstrated  with  powerful 
proofs and examples in the Risale-i Nur, present in pleasures and enjoyment outside 
the bounds of the licit are pains and distress ten times greater. You may find detailed 
expositions  of  this  in  the  Risale-i  Nur.  For  instance,  the  Sixth,  Seventh  and  Eighth 
Words from The Short Words and A Guide For Youth will elucidate this truth for you 
completely in place of me. In which case, make do with licit pleasures and be content 
with them. Innocent conversation with  your innocent children in  your home is more 
pleasurable than a hundred cinemas. 

You should also know certainly that true pleasure in the life of this world lies in 
belief and the sphere of faith. There is an immaterial pleasure to be found in all good 
works. The Risale-i Nur has proved with hundreds  

264

of  decisive  evidences  that  even  in  this  world  most  bitter  and  grievous  suffering  is 
present in vice and misguidance. I myself have experienced on numerous occasions as 
certainly as seeing it with my own eyes, that a seed of Paradise is contained in belief, 
while  a  seed  of  Hell  is  found  in  vice and  misguidance.  This  truth  is  repeated many 
times in the Risale-i Nur. Although the Risale-i Nur has come into the hands of those 
who  oppose  it  most  obstinately  and  severely,  they  have  been  unable  to  refute  this 
truth;  neither  have  the  committees  of  experts  and  the  courts  been  able  to  refute  it. 
Now,  my  blessed  and  innocent  sisters  and  your  children  who  are  like  my  spiritual 
children,  foremost  the  Treatise  on  Islamic  Dress,  and  A  Guide  For  Youth,  and The 
Short Words should teach you in my place. 

I have heard that you want me to teach you in the mosque, but my wretched state 
and  my  illness  and  many  other  circumstances  do  not  permit  it.  I  have  decided  to 
include  all  my  sisters  who  read  and  accept  this  instruction  which  I  have  written  for 
you in all my prayers and spiritual gains, like all  the students of the Risale-i Nur. If 
you  obtain  and  read  part  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  in  my  place,  or  listen  to  it,  then  in 
accordance with my rule you too will have a share in the prayers and spiritual gains of 
all the Risale-i Nur students, your brothers. 

I was going to write more, but I am very ill and very weak and very old and have 
many duties like correcting copies of the Risale-i Nur, so for now I have sufficed with 
this much. 
 
                                                     The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 
                                                 Your brother who is in need of your prayers, 
                                                                     S a i d   N u r s i 

 

 

 

265

The Twenty-Fifth Flash 

Message for the Sick 

[This treatise consists of twenty-five remedies. It was written 
as  a  salve,  a  solace,  and  a  prescription  for  the  sick,  and  in 
order to visit them and wish them a speedy recovery.] 

Warning and Apology 

This  immaterial  prescription  was  written  with  a  speed  greater  than  all  my 
other  writings,1  and  since  time  could  not  be  found  to  correct  and  study  it, 
unlike  all  the  others  it  was  read  only  once,  and  that  at  great  speed  like  its 
composition. That is to say, it has remained in the disordered state of a first 
draft. I did not consider it necessary to go over carefully the things which had 
occurred to me in a natural manner, lest they be spoilt by arranging them and 
paying them undue attention. Readers and especially the sick should not feel 
upset  and  offended  at  any  disagreeable  expressions  or  harsh  words  and 
phrases; let them rather pray for me. 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Those  who  say  when  afflicted  by  calamity:  “To  God  do  we  belong  and  to 
Him is our return.”(2:156) * Who gives me food and drink * And when I am 
ill it is He Who cures me.(26:79-80) 

In  this  Flash,  we  describe  briefly  twenty-five  remedies  which  may  offer  true 
consolation and a beneficial cure for the sick and those struck by disaster, who form 
one tenth of mankind. 

                                                 

1 This treatise was written in four and a half hours.  
                                                        Signed, Rüştü, Re’fet, Hüsrev, Said. 
 

 

266

FIRST REMEDY 

Unhappy  sick  person!  Do  not  be  anxious,  have  patience!  Your  illness  is  not  a 
malady for you; it is a sort of cure. For life departs like capital; if it yields no fruits, it 
is wasted;  and  if  it  passes  in  ease  and  heedlessness,  it  passes  swiftly.  Illness  makes 
that capital of  yours yield huge profits. Moreover, it does not allow  your life to pass 
quickly, it restrains it and lengthens it, so that it will depart after yielding its fruits. An 
indication that  your life is lengthened through illness is the following much repeated 
proverb: “The times of calamity are long, the times of happiness, most brief.” 

SECOND REMEDY 

O  ill  person  who  lacks  patience!  Be  patient,  indeed,  offer  thanks!  Your  illness 
may  transform  each  of  the  minutes  of  your  life  into  the  equivalent  of  an  hour’s 
worship. For worship is of two kinds. One is positive like the well-known worship of 
supplication and the five daily prayers. The other are negative forms of worship like 
illness and calamities. By means of these, those afflicted realize their impotence and 
weakness; they beseech their All-Compassionate Creator and take refuge in Him; they 
manifest  worship  which  is  sincere  and  without  hyprocrisy.  Yes,  there  is  a  sound 
narration stating that a life passed in illness is counted as worship for the believer – on 
condition he does not complain about God.2 It is even established by sound narrations 
and by those who uncover the realities of creation that one minute’s illness of some 
people who are completely patient and thankful becomes the equivalent of an hour’s 
worship  and  a  minute’s  illness  of  certain  perfected  men  the  equivalent  of  a  day’s 
worship. So you should not complain about an illness which as though transforms one 
minute of  your  life  into  a  thousand  minutes and gains  for  you  long  life;  you  should 
offer thanks. 

THIRD REMEDY 

Impatient sick person! The  fact that those who come to this world continuously 
depart,  and  the  young  grow  old,  and  man  perpetually  revolves  amid  death  and 
separation  testifies  that  he  did  not  come  to  this  world  to  enjoy  himself  and  receive 
pleasure.   

Moreover, while man is the most perfect, the most elevated, of living beings and 
the best endowed in regard to members and faculties, he dwells on past pleasures and 
future pains, and so passes a grievous, troublesome  

                                                 

2 al-Albani, Sahih Jami‘ al-Saghir, 256. See also, al-Suyuti, al-Fath al-Kabir, ii, 148. 

 

267

life, lower than the animals. This means that man did not come to this world to live in 
a fine manner and pass his life in ease and pleasure. Rather, he possesses vast capital, 
and he came here to work and do trade for an eternal, everlasting life.  

The capital given to man  is  his  lifetime. Had there been  no illness,  good health 
and  well-being  would  have  caused  heedlessness,  for  they  show  the  world  to  be 
pleasant and make the hereafter forgotten. They do not want death and the grave to be 
thought  of;  they  cause  the  capital  of  life  to  be  wasted  on  trifles.  Whereas  illness 
suddenly  opens  the  eyes,  it  says  to  the  body:  “You  are  not  immortal.  You  have  not 
been left to your own devices. You have a duty. Give up your pride, think of the One 
who  created  you.  Know  that  you  will  enter  the  grave,  so  prepare  yourself  for  it!” 
From  this  point  of  view,  illness  is  an  admonishing  guide  and  adviser  that  never 
deceives. It should not be complained about in this respect, indeed, should be thanked 
for. And if it is not too severe, patience should be sought to endure it. 

FOURTH REMEDY 

Plaintive ill person! You have no right to complain; what is due to you is to offer 
thanks  and  be  patient.  For  your  body  and  members  and  faculties  are  not  your 
property. You did not make them,  nor did you did buy them  from other workshops. 
That means they are someone else’s property, and their owner  has disposal over  his 
property as he wishes.  

As  is  related  in  the  Twenty-Sixth  Word,  an  extremely  wealthy  and  skilful 
craftsman, for example, employs a poor man as a model in order to show off his fine 
art and considerable wealth. In return for a wage, for a brief hour he clothes the poor 
man in a bejewelled and skilfully wrought garment. He works it on him and gives it 
various  states.  In  order  to  display  the  extraordinary  varieties  of  his  art,  he  cuts  the 
garment, alters it, and lengthens and shortens it. Does the poor wage-earner have the 
right to say to that person: “You are causing me trouble, you are causing me distress 
with  the  form  you  have  given  it,  making  me  bow  down  and  stand  up?”  Has  he  the 
right to tell him that he is spoiling his fine appearance by trimming and shortening the 
garment which makes him beautiful? Can he tell him he is being unkind and unfair?  

O  sick  person!  Just  like  in  this  comparison,  in  order  to  display  the  garment  of 
your body with which He has clothed you, bejewelled with luminous faculties like the 
eye,  the  ear,  the  reason,  and  the  heart,  and  the  embroideries  of  His  most  beautiful 
names, the All-Glorious Maker makes you revolve amid numerous states and changes 
you in many situations. Just  

 

268

as you learn of His name of Provider through hunger, so come to know His name of 
Healer through your illness. Since suffering and calamities show the decrees of some 
of His names, many instances of good are to be found within those flashes of wisdom 
and rays of mercy. If the veil of illness, which you fear and loathe, were to be lifted, 
behind it you would find many agreeable and beautiful meanings. 

FIFTH REMEDY 

O  you  who  is  afflicted  with  illness!  Through  experience,  I  have  formed  the 
opinion  at  this  time  that  for  some  people  sickness  is  a  divine  bounty,  a  gift  of  the 
Most  Merciful.  Although  I  was  not  worthy of  it,  over  the  past  eight  or  nine  years  a 
number  of  young  people  have  come  to  me  in  connection  with  their  illnesses,  to 
request  my  prayers.  I  have  noticed  that  all  of  them  have  begun  to  think  of  the 
hereafter  more  than  other  young  people.  They  lack  the  drunkenness  of  youth,  and 
have renounced to an extent animal desires and heedlessness. So I consider them and 
then remind them that their illnesses are a divine bounty within bearable limits. I tell 
them: “Brother!  I am  not opposed to this  illness  of  yours. I don’t feel  sorry  for  you 
because of it that I should pray for you. Try to be patient until the illness awakens you 
completely,  and  once  it  has  performed  its  duty,  the  Compassionate  Creator  will 
restore you to health, God willing.” 

I  also  tell  them:  “Owing  to  the  calamity  of  good  health,  some  of  your  fellows 
become neglectful, give up the five daily prayers, do not think of the grave, and forget 
God Almighty. The superficial pleasure of a brief hour’s worldly life causes them to 
shake  and  damage  eternal  life,  and  even  to  destroy  it.  Whereas  because  of  your 
illness, you see the grave, which you will in any event enter, and the dwellings of the 
hereafter beyond it, and you act accordingly. So for you, illness is good health, while 
for some of your peers good health is a sickness.” 

SIXTH REMEDY 

O sick person who complains about his suffering! I say to you: think of your past 
life and remember the pleasurable, happy days and the distressing, troublesome times, 
and you will surely exclaim either “Oh!” or “Ah!” That is, your heart and tongue will 
either say “All praise and thanks be to God!”, or “Alas and alack!”  Note carefully, 
what makes you exclaim “Praise and thanks be to God!” is thinking of the pains and 
calamities  that  have  befallen  you;  they  induce  a  sort  of  pleasure  so  that  your  heart 
offers  thanks,  for  the  passing  of  pain  is  a  pleasure.  With  the  passing  of  pains  and 
calamities,  a  legacy  of  pleasure  is  left  in  the  spirit,  which  on  being  aroused  by 
thinking, pours forth from the spirit in thanks.  

 

269

What makes you exclaim “Alas and alack!” are the pleasurable and happy times 
you  have  experienced  in  the  past,  which  with  their  passing  leave  a  legacy  in  your 
spirit  of  constant  pain.  Whenever  you  think  of  them,  the  pain  is  again  stimulated, 
causing regret and sorrow to pour forth. 

Since one day’s illicit pleasure sometimes causes a year’s suffering in the spirit, 
and  with  the  pain  of  a  fleeting  day’s  illness  causes  many  days’  pleasure  and 
recompense  in  addition  to  the  pleasure  at  being  relieved  at  its  passing,  think  of  the 
result of this temporary illness with which you are now afflicted, and of the merits of 
its inner face. Say: “All is from God! This too will pass!”, and offer thanks instead of 
complaining. 
SIXTH REMEDY3 

O brother who thinks of the pleasures of this world and suffers distress at illness! 
If this world were everlasting, and if on our way there were no death, and if the winds 
of separation and decease did not blow, and if there were no winters of the  spirit  in 
the  calamitous  and  stormy  future,  I  would  have  pitied  you  together  with  you.  But 
since one day the world will bid us to leave it and will close its ears to our cries, we 
must forego our love of it now through the warnings of these illnesses, before it drives 
us out. We must try to abandon it in our hearts before it abandons us. 

Yes, illness utters this warning to us: “Your body is  not composed of stone and 
iron, but of various materials which are ever disposed to parting. Leave off your pride, 
perceive  your  impotence,  recognize  your  Owner,  know  your  duties,  learn  why  you 
came to this world!” It declares this secretly in the heart’s ear. 

Moreover, since the pleasures and enjoyment of this world do not continue, and 
particularly if they are illicit they are both fleeting, and full of pain, and sinful, do not 
weep on the pretext of illness because you have lost those pleasures. On the contrary, 
think of the aspects of worship and reward in the hereafter to be found in illness, and 
try to receive pleasure from those. 

SEVENTH REMEDY 

O sick person who has lost the pleasures of health! Your illness does not spoil the 
pleasure  of  divine  bounties,  on  the  contrary,  it  causes  them  to  be  experienced  and 
increases them. For if something is continuous, it loses its effect. The people of reality 
even say that “Things are known through their  

                                                 

3 This Flash occurred to me in a natural manner, and two remedies have been included in the 
Sixth Remedy. We have left it thus in order not to spoil the naturalness; indeed, we did not change it 
thinking there may be some mystery contained in it. 

 

270

opposites.”  For  example,  if  there  were  no  darkness,  light  would  not  be  known  and 
would produce no pleasure. If there were no cold, heat could not be comprehended. If 
there  were  no  hunger,  food  would  afford  no pleasure.  If  there were  no  thirst  of the 
stomach, there would be no pleasure in drinking water. If there were no sickness, no 
pleasure would be had from good health. 

The  All-Wise  Creator’s  decking  out  man  with  truly  numerous  members  and 
faculties, to the extent that he may experience and recognize the innumerable varieties 
of bounties in the universe, shows that He wants to make him aware of every sort of 
His bounty and to acquaint him with them and to impel him to offer constant thanks. 
Since this is so, He will give illness, sickness, and suffering, the same as He bestows 
good health and well-being. I ask you: If you had not suffered this illness in your head 
or in your hand or stomach, would you have perceived the pleasurable and enjoyable 
divine bounty of the good health of your head, hand or stomach, and offered thanks? 
For sure, you would not have even thought of it, let alone offering thanks for it! You 
would have unconsciously spent that good health on heedlessness, and perhaps even 
on dissipation. 

EIGHTH REMEDY 

O sick person who thinks of the hereafter! Sickness washes away the dirt of sins 
like soap, and cleanses. It is established in a sound Hadith that illnesses are atonement 
for sins. And in another Hadith, it says: “As ripe fruits fall on their tree being shaken, 
so the sins of a believer fall away on his shaking with illness.”4 

Sins  are  the  chronic  illnesses  of  eternal  life,  and  in  this  worldly  life  they  are 
sicknesses of the heart, conscience, and spirit. If you are patient and do not complain, 
you  will  be  saved  through  this  temporary  sickness  from  numerous  perpetual 
sicknesses. If  you do not think of  your sins, or do not know the hereafter, or do not 
recognize God, you suffer from an illness so fearsome it is a million times worse than 
your  present  minor  illnesses.  Cry  out  at  that,  for  all  the  beings  in  the  world  are 
connected  with  your  heart,  spirit,  and  soul.  Those  connections  are  continuously 
severed by death and separation, opening up innumerable wounds. Particularly since 
you  do  not  know  the  hereafter  and  imagine  death  to  be  eternal  non-existence,  as 
though lacerated and bruised, your being suffers illness to the extent of the world.  

                                                 

335; iii, 4, 18, 38, 48, 61, 81. 

4 Bukhari, Marda, 1, 2, 13, 16; Muslim, Birr, 45; Darimi, Riqaq, 57; Musnad, i, 371, 441; ii, 303, 

 

271

Thus, the first thing you have to do is to search for the cure of belief, which is the 
certain healing remedy for the innumerable illnesses afflicting that infinitely wounded 
and sick, extensive immaterial being of  yours;  you have to correct  your beliefs. The 
shortest way of finding such a  cure is to recognize the power and mercy of the All-
Powerful  One  of  Glory  by  means  of  the  window  of  your  weakness  and  impotence 
shown you behind the curtain of heedlessness, rent by your physical illness. 

Yes, one who does not recognize God is afflicted by a world-full of tribulations. 
While  the  world  of  one  who  does  recognize  Him  is  full  of  light  and  spiritual 
happiness;  he  perceives  these  in  accordance  with  the  strength  of  his  belief.  The 
suffering resulting from insignificant physical illnesses is dissolved by the immaterial 
joy, healing, and pleasure that arise from belief; the suffering melts away. 

NINTH REMEDY 

O  sick  person  who  recognizes  his  Creator!  Illness  gives  rise  to  pain,  fear,  and 
anxiety  because  it  sometimes  leads  to death.  Since  superficially  and  to  the  heedless 
death is terrifying, illnesses which may lead to it cause fear and apprehension. 

So know firstly and believe firmly that the appointed hour is determined and does 
not change. Those weeping beside the grievously sick and those in perfect health have 
died, while the grievously sick have been cured and lived. 

Secondly:  Death  is  not  terrifying  as  it  appears  to  be  superficially.  Through  the 
light  afforded  by  the  All-Wise  Qur’an,  in  many  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  we  have 
proved in completely certain and indubitable fashion that for believers death is to be 
discharged  from  the  burdensome  duties  of  life.  For  them  it  is  a  rest  from  worship, 
which forms the instruction and training in the arena of trial of this world. It is also a 
means of their rejoining friends and relations, ninety-nine out of a hundred of whom 
have already departed for the next world. It is a means of entering their true homeland 
and  eternal  abodes  of  happiness.  It  is  also  an  invitation  to  the  gardens  of  Paradise 
from the dungeon of this  world. And it is the time they receive their wage from the 
munificence  of  the  Most  Compassionate  Creator  in  return  for  service  rendered  to 
Him. Since the reality of death is this, it should be regarded not as terrifying, but on 
the contrary as the introduction to mercy and happiness. 

Moreover, some of the people of God have feared death, not out of terror at it but 
because they hoped to gain additional merit by performing more good works with the 
duties of life continuing. 

 

272

Yes,  for  the  people  of  belief,  death  is  the  door  to  divine  mercy,  while  for  the 

people of misguidance, it is the pit of everlasting darkness. 

TENTH REMEDY 

O  sick  person  who  worries  unnecessarily!  You  worry  at  the  severity  of  your 
illness and that worry exacerbates it. If you want your illness to be less severe, try not 
to worry. That is, think of the benefits of your illness, the recompense for it, and that 
it will pass quickly; it will remove the worry and cut the illness at the root. 

In fact, worry doubles the illness, for it causes an immaterial illness of the heart 
underlying the physical illness; the physical illness subsists through that and persists. 
If  the  worry  ceases  through  submission,  contentment,  and  comprehension  of  the 
reason for the illness, a large part of the illness is eradicated; it becomes less severe 
and  in  part  disappears.  Sometimes  a  minor  physical  illness  increases  tenfold  just 
through anxiety. If the anxiety ceases, nine tenths of the illness disappears. 

Worry  increases  illness.  It  also  an  accusation  against  divine  wisdom  and  a 
criticism of divine mercy and complaint against the Compassionate Creator. For this 
reason, the person who worries receives a rebuff and it increases his illness contrary 
to his intentions. Yes, just as thanks increases bounty, so complaint increases illness 
and tribulations. 

Furthermore,  worry  is  itself  an  illness.  Its  cure  is  to  recognize  the  wisdom  in 
illness and its purpose. Since you have now learnt these, apply the salve to your worry 
and  find  relief!  Say  “Ah!”  instead  of  “Oh!”,  and  “All  praise  be  to  God  for  every 
situation” instead of sighing and lamenting. 

ELEVENTH REMEDY 

O  my  impatient  sick  brother!  Although  illness  causes  you  an  immediate 
suffering,  your  illness  through  the  past  until  today  produces  a  spiritual  pleasure  and 
happiness arising from the reward received for enduring it. From today forward, from 
this hour even, the illness does not exist, and certainly no pain is suffered from non-
being. And if there is no pain, there can be no distress. You become impatient because 
you imagine things wrongly. For both the physical illness prior to today, and its pain, 
have  departed;  all  that  remains  are  its  reward  and  the  pleasure  at  its  passing.  This 
should afford you profit and happiness, so to think of past days and feel grieved and 
impatient  is  crazy.  Future days  have  not  yet  arrived.  To dwell  on  them now, and  to 
feel upset and impatient by imagining a day that does not exist and an illness that does 
not  exist  and  distress  that  does  not  exist,  is  to  impart  existence  to  three  degrees  of 
non-existence – if that is not crazy, what is? 

 

273

If  the  previous  hour  was  one  of  illness,  it  produces  joy;  and  since  the  time 
subsequent to the present hour is non-existent, and both the illness and the distress are 
non-existent, do not scatter the power of patience given you by Almighty God to right 
and  left,  but  muster  it  in  the  face  of  pain  of  the  present  hour;  say:  “O  Most  Patient 
One!” and withstand it. 

TWELFTH REMEDY 

O sick person who due to illness cannot perform his worship and invocations and 
feels grief at the deprivation! Know that it is stated in a Hadith that “A pious believer 
who due to illness cannot perform his customary invocations, receives a reward equal 
to them.”5 If an ill person performs his obligatory worship as far as it is possible with 
patience and relying on God, the illness takes the place of Sunna worship during that 
time of severe illness – and in sincere form. 

Moreover,  illness  makes  the  person  understand  his  impotence  and  weakness;  it 
causes  him  to  offer  supplication  both  verbally  and  through  the  tongue  of  his 
impotence and weakness. For Almighty God bestowed on man a boundless impotence 
and infinite weakness so that he would perpetually seek refuge at the divine court and 
beseech and supplicate. The verse,  

Say:  Your  Sustainer  would  not  concern  Himself  with  you  if  it  was  not  for 
your prayers;(25:77)  

has the  meaning,  “what  importance  would  you  have  if  you  did  not offer  prayer  and 
supplication?”  According  to  this,  sincere  prayer  and  supplication  are  the  reason  for 
man’s creation and for his value. Since illness is one cause of this, from this point of 
view  it should not be complained about but thanks be offered to God for it, and the 
tap of supplication which illness opens should not be closed by regaining health. 

THIRTEENTH REMEDY 

O  unhappy  person  who  complains  at  illness!  For  some  people  illness  is  a  rich 

treasury, a precious divine gift. Every sick person can think of his illness in this way. 

The appointed hour is not known: in order to deliver man from absolute despair 
and  absolute  heedlessness,  and  to  hold  him  between  hope  and  fear  and  so  preserve 
both  this  world  and  the  hereafter,  in  His  wisdom  Almighty  God  has  concealed  the 
appointed hour; it may come at any time.  If  it captures man  in  heedlessness, it may 
cause grievous harm to eternal life.  

                                                 

5 Bukhari, Jihad, 134; Musnad, iv, 410, 418. 

 

274

Illness, however, dispels the heedlessness; it makes a person think of the hereafter; it 
recalls death, so he may prepare himself. Some illnesses are so profitable as to gain 
for a person  in twenty days a rank they could not otherwise  have risen to in twenty 
years. 

For instance, among my friends were two youths, may God have mercy on them. 
One was Sabri from the village of ‹lema, the other Vezirzâde Mustafa from ‹slâmköy. 
I  used  to  note  with  amazement  that  although  these  two  could  not  write  they  were 
among the foremost in regard to sincerity and the service of belief. I did not know the 
reason for this. After their deaths I understood that each had suffered from a serious 
illness.  Due  to  the  guidance  of  the  illness,  they  had  considerable  fear  of  God, 
performed  highly  valuable  service,  and  attained  a  state  beneficial  to  the  hereafter, 
unlike  other  youths  who  heedlessly  gave  up  obligatory  worship.  God  willing,  the 
distress of two years’ illness allowed them to attain the happiness of millions of years 
of eternal life. I understand now that the prayers I sometimes offered for their health 
were maledictions in respect of this world. God willing, they were accepted for their 
well-being in the hereafter. 

Thus, according to my belief, the two gained profit equal to that which may be 
gained through ten years’ fear of God. If like some young people, they had relied on 
their  youth  and  good  health  and  thrown  themselves  into  heedlessness and  vice,  and 
stalking them, death had grabbed them right in the midst of the filth of their sins, they 
would  have  made  their  graves  into  nests  of  scorpions  and  snakes,  instead  of  that 
treasury of lights. 

Since  illnesses  contain  such  benefits,  they  should  be  not  complained  about  but 
borne with patience, relying on God, indeed, thanking God and having confidence in 
His mercy. 

FOURTEENTH REMEDY 

O sick person whose eyes have developed cataracts! If you knew what a light and 
spiritual eye is to be found beneath the cataract that may cover a believer’s eyes, you 
would exclaim: “A hundred thousand thanks to my Compassionate Sustainer!” I shall 
recount an incident to explain this salve. It is as follows: 

One time, the aunt of Süleyman from Barla, who served me for eight years with 
complete loyalty  and  willingness,  became  blind.  Owing  to  her  good opinion  of  me, 
which was a hundred times better than I deserved, the righteous woman caught me by 
the door of the mosque and asked me to pray for her sight to be restored. So I made 
the  blessed  woman’s  righteousness  the  intercessor  for  my  supplication,  and 
beseeching Almighty God, I  

 

275

prayed:  “O  Lord!  Restore  her  sight  out of  respect  for  her  righteousness.”  Two days 
later,  an  oculist  from  Burdur  came  and  removed  the  cataract.  Forty  days  later  she 
again  lost her sight. I was most upset and prayed fervently  for her. God willing, the 
prayer was accepted for her life in the hereafter, otherwise that prayer of mine would 
have been a mistaken malediction for her. For forty days had remained till her death; 
forty days later she died – May God have mercy on her. 

Thus, rather than  gazing sorrowfully at the gardens of Barla with the eye of old 
age,  she profited  in  her  grave  by  being  able  to  gaze  for  forty  thousand  days  on  the 
gardens of Paradise. For her belief was strong and she was completely righteous. 

Yes, if a believer loses his sight and enters the grave blind, in accordance with his 
degree he may gaze on the world of light to an extent much greater than other dead in 
their graves. Just as we see many things in this world that blind believers do not see, if 
the  blind  depart  with  belief,  they  see  to  a  greater  extent  than  other  dead  in  their 
graves. They can behold the  gardens of Paradise  and watch them  like the cinema  as 
though looking through the most powerful telescopes, according to their degree. 

Thus, through thanks and patience you may find beneath the veil on your present 
eye an eye which is thus light-filled, and with which while beneath the earth you may 
see  and  observe  Paradise  above  the  skies.  That  which  will  raise  the  veil  from  your 
eye, the eye doctor that will allow you to look with that eye, is the All-Wise Qur’an.  

FIFTEENTH REMEDY 

O sick person who sighs and laments! Do not look at the outward aspect of illness 
and  sigh,  consider  its  meaning  and  be  pleased.  If  in  meaning  illness  had  not  been 
good, the All-Compassionate Creator would not have given it to the servants He loves 
most. For there is a Hadith the meaning of which is, “Those afflicted with the severest 
trials  are  the  prophets,  then  the  saints  and  those  like  them.”6  That  is,  “Those  most 
afflicted  with  tribulations  and  difficulties  are  the  best  of  men,  the  most  perfect.” 
Foremost the Prophet Job (Peace be upon him) and the other prophets, then the saints, 
then the righteous, have regarded the illnesses they have suffered as sincere worship, 
as  gifts of the Most Merciful; they  have offered thanks  in patience. They  have  seen 
them as surgical operations performed by the All-Compassionate Creator’s mercy. 

                                                 

6 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, i, 519, no: 1056; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 343; Bukhari, Marda, 
3; Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 57; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 23; Darimi, Riqaq, 67; Musnad, i, 172, 174, 180, 185; vi, 369. 

 

276

O you who cries out and laments! If you want to join this luminous caravan, offer 
thanks in patience. For if  you complain, they  will not accept  you. You will fall into 
the pits of the people of misguidance, and travel a dark road. 

Yes, there are some illnesses which if they lead to death, are a sort of martyrdom; 
they result in a similar degree of sainthood. For example, people become martyrs who 
die  from  the  illnesses  accompanying  childbirth7  and  pains  of  the  abdomen,  and  by 
drowning, burning, and plague. There are also many blessed illnesses which gain the 
degree of sainthood for those who die from them. Moreover, since illness lessens love 
of  the  world  and  attachment  to  it,  it  lightens  parting  from  the  world  through  death, 
which for the worldly is extremely grievous and painful, and it sometimes even makes 
it desirable. 

SIXTEENTH REMEDY 

O  sick  person  who  complains  at  his  distress!  Illness  prompts  respect  and 
compassion,  which  are  most  important  and  good  in  human  social  life.  For  it  saves 
man  from  self-sufficiency,  which drives  him  to  unsociableness  and  unkindness.  For 
according to the meaning of the verse, 

Indeed man transgresses all bounds * In that he looks upon himself as self-
sufficient,(96:6-7) 

an  evil-commanding  soul  which  feels  self-sufficient  due  to  good  health  and  well-
being, does not feel respect towards his brothers in many instances, who are deserving 
of it. And he does not feel compassion towards the sick and those smitten by disaster, 
although they deserve kindness and pity. Whenever he is ill, he understands his own 
powerlessness and want and he has respect towards his brothers who are worthy of it. 
He feels respect towards his believing brothers who visit him or assist him. He feels 
human  kindness,  which  arises  from  fellow-feeling,  and compassion  for  those  struck 
by disaster, a most important Islamic characteristic. And comparing them to himself, 
he  pities  them  in  the  true  meaning  of  the  word and  feels  compassion  for  them.  He 
does what he can to help them, and at the very least prays for them and goes to visit 
them  to  ask  them  how  they  are,  which  is  Sunna  according  to  the  Shari‘a,  and  thus 
earns reward. 

                                                 

7 The period this martyrdom may be won through illness is around the forty days of ‘lying-in.’ 

 

277

SEVENTEENTH REMEDY 

O  sick  person  who  complains  at  not  being  able  to  perform  good  works  due  to 
illness! Offer thanks! It is illness that opens to you the door of the sincerest of good 
works.  In  addition  to continuously  gaining  reward  for  the  sick  person  and  for  those 
who  look  after  him  for  God’s  sake,  illness  is  a  most  important  means  for  the 
acceptance of supplications. 

Indeed, there is  significant reward for believers  looking after the  sick. Inquiring 
after their health and visiting the sick – on condition it does not tax them – is Sunna8 
and also atonement for sins. There  is an  Hadith  which says, “Receive the prayers of 
the sick, for they are acceptable.”9 

To look after the sick, especially if they are relations, or parents in particular, is 
important  worship,  yielding  significant  reward.  To  please  a  sick  person’s  heart  and 
console him, is a sort of significant alms-giving. Fortunate is the person who pleases 
the easily touched hearts of father and mother at a time of  illness and receives their 
prayer. Even the angels applaud, exclaiming: “Ma’shallah! Barekallah!” before loyal 
scenes of those good offspring who respond with perfect respect and filial kindness at 
the time of their parents’ illness showing the exaltedness of humanity – for they are 
the most worthy of respect in the life of society. 

Yes,  pleasures  are  experienced  at  the  time  of  illness  which  arise  from  the 
kindness, pity, and compassion of those around, and are most pleasant and agreeable 
and reduce the pains of illness to nothing. The acceptability of the prayers of the sick 
is an  important matter. For the past thirty or forty  years, I myself  have prayed to be 
cured from the illness of lumbago from which I suffer. However, I understood that the 
illness had been given for prayer. Since prayer cannot be removed by prayer; that is, 
since prayer cannot remove itself, I understood that the results of prayer pertain to the 
hereafter,10 and that it is a sort of worship, for through illness one understands one’s 
impotence and seeks refuge at the divine court. Therefore, although for thirty  years I 
have  offered  supplications  to  be  healed  and  apparently  my  prayer  has  not  been 
accepted,  it  has  not  occurred  to  me  to  give  it  up.  For  illness  is  the  time  for 
supplication.  To  be  cured  is  not  the  result  of  the  supplication.  If  the  All-Wise  and 
Compassionate One bestows healing, He bestows it out of His abundant grace. 

                                                 

8 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, ii, 45, No: 1285. 
9 Ibn Maja, Jana’iz, 1; Daylami, Musnad al-Firdaws, i, 280. 
10 Yes, while certain illnesses are the reason for the existence of supplication, if the supplication is 

the cause of the illness’ non-existence, the existence of the supplication would be the cause of its own 
non-existence, and this could not be the case. 

 

278

Furthermore, if supplications are not accepted in the form we wish, it should not 
be said that they have not been accepted. The All-Wise Creator knows better than us; 
He gives whatever is in our interests. Sometimes he directs our prayers for this world 
towards the hereafter, and accepts them in that way. In any event, a supplication that 
acquires sincerity  due  to  illness and  arises  from weakness,  impotence, humility  and 
need, is  very close to being acceptable. Illness makes  supplication sincere. Both the 
sick who are religious, and believers who look after the sick, should take advantage of 
this supplication. 

EIGHTEENTH REMEDY 

O sick person who gives up offering thanks and takes up complaining! Complaint 
arises from a right, and none of your rights have been lost that you should complain. 
Indeed, there are numerous thanks which are an obligation for you, a right over you, 
and these  you have not performed. Without Almighty God giving  you the right,  you 
are complaining as though demanding rights  in a manner which  is  not rightful. You 
cannot look at others superior to  you in degree who are healthy, and complain. You 
are rather charged with looking at the sick who from the point of view of health are at 
a degree lower than yourself, and should offer thanks. If your hand is broken, look at 
theirs, which  is  severed. If  you have only one eye, look at the blind, who  lack both 
eyes, and offer thanks to God! 

For  sure,  no  one  has  the  right  to  look  to  those  superior  to  him  in  regard  to 
bounties and complain. Concerning tribulations, it is everyone’s right to look to those 
above  themselves  in that  regard,  so  that  they  should offer  thanks.  This  mystery  has 
been  explained  in  a  number  of  places  in  the  Risale-i  Nur  with  a  comparison;  a 
summary of it is as follows: 

A person takes a wretched man to the top of a minaret. On every  step  he  gives 
him  a  different  gift,  a  different  bounty.  Right  at  the  top  he  gives  him  the  largest 
present. Although he wants thanks and gratitude in return for all those various gifts, 
the peevish man forgets the presents he has received on each of the stairs, or considers 
them  to be of  no  importance,  and offering  no  thanks,  looks  above  him  and  starts  to 
complain,  saying,  “If  only  the  minaret  had  been  higher,  I  could  have  climbed  even 
further. Why isn’t it as tall as that mountain over there or that other minaret?” What 
great ingratitude it would be if he begins to complain like this, what a wrong!  

In just the same way, man comes into existence from nothing, not as a rock or a 
tree  or  an  animal,  but  as  a  human  being  and  a  Muslim,  and  most  of  the  time 
experiences  good  health  and  acquires  a  high  level  of  bounties.  Despite  all  this,  to 
complain and display impatience because he is not  

 

279

worthy of some bounties, or because he loses them through wrong choices or abuse, 
or  because  he  could  not  obtain  them,  and  to  criticize  divine  dominicality  saying 
“What  have  I  done  that  this  has  happened  to  me?”,  is  a  state  of  mind  and  spiritual 
sickness  more  calamitous  than  the  physical  one.  Like  fighting  with  a  broken  hand, 
complaint makes his illness worse. Sensible is the person who in accordance with the 
meaning of the verse,  

Those who when struck by calamity say: To God do we belong, and to God is 
our return(2:156) 

submits and is patient, so that the illness may complete its duty, then depart. 

NINETEENTH REMEDY 

As  the  attribute  of  the  Eternally  Besought  One,  “the  most  beautiful  names” 
indicates, all the All-Beauteous One of Glory’s  names are beautiful. Among beings, 
life  is  the  most  subtle,  the  most  beautiful,  and  the  most  comprehensive  mirror  of 
Eternal  Besoughtedness.  The  mirror  to  the  beautiful  becomes  beautiful.  The  mirror 
that displays the virtues of beauty becomes beautiful. Just as whatever is done to the 
mirror by  such  beauty  is  good  and beautiful,  whatever  befalls  life  too,  in  respect  of 
reality,  is  good. For  it displays the  beautiful  impresses  of the  most beautiful  names, 
which are good and beautiful. 

Life becomes a deficient mirror if it passes monotonously with permanent health 
and well-being. In one respect, it suggests non-existence, non-being, and nothingness, 
and  causes  weariness.  It  reduces  the  life’s  value  and  transforms  the  pleasure  of  life 
into  distress.  For  thinking  he  will  pass  his  time  quickly,  out  of  boredom  a  person 
throws  himself  either  into  vice  or  into  amusements.  He  becomes  hostile  to  his 
valuable life and wants to kill it and make it pass quickly as though it were a prison 
sentence. But when it revolves in change and action and different states, life makes its 
value  felt,  and  its  importance  and  pleasure.  Such  a  person  does  not  want  his  life  to 
pass quickly, even if it is in hardship and tribulation. He does not complain wearily, 
saying, “Alas! The sun hasn’t set yet,” or, “it is still nighttime.” 

Yes,  ask  a  fine  gentleman  who  is  rich  and  idle  and  living  in  the  lap  of  luxury, 
“How are you?” You are bound to hear a pathetic reply like: “The time never passes. 
Let’s have a game of backgammon. Or let’s find some amusement to pass the time.” 
Or else  you will hear complaints arising  from worldly  ambition, like: “I  haven’t  got 
that; if only I had done such-and-such.” 

Then ask someone struck by disaster or a worker or poor man living in  

 

280

penury: “How are you?” If he is sensible, he will reply: “All thanks be to God, I am 
working. If only the evening did not come so quickly, I could have finished this work! 
Time passes  so quickly, and so does life; they flash by. For sure things are  hard for 
me, but that will pass too. Everything passes quickly.” He in effect says how valuable 
life is and how regretful he is at its passing. That means he perceives the pleasure and 
value of life through hardship and labour. As for ease and health, they make life bitter 
and make one hope for its speedy passing. 

My  brother  who  is  sick!  Know  that  non-existence  is  the  origin  and  leaven  of 
calamities and evils, and even of sins, is, as is proved decisively and in detail in other 
parts of the Risale-i Nur. As for non-existence, it is evil. Monotonous states like ease, 
silence,  tranquillity,  and  arrest  are  close  to  non-existence  and  nothingness,  and 
therefore make felt the darkness of non-existence and cause distress. As for action and 
change, they are existence and make existence felt. And existence is pure good; it is 
light. 

Since  the  reality  is  thus,  your  illness  has  been  sent  to  your being  as  a  guest  to 
perform  many  duties  such  as  purifying  your  valuable  life,  and  strengthening  it  and 
making  it  progress,  and  inducing  the  other  human  faculties  in  your  being  to  turn  in 
assistance towards your sick member, and to display various of the All-Wise Maker’s 
names.  God  willing,  it  will  carry  out  its  duties  quickly  and  depart,  and  will  say  to 
good  health:  “Come,  and  stay  permanently  in  my  place,  and  carry  out  your  duties. 
This house is yours. Remain here in good health.” 

TWENTIETH REMEDY 

O sick person who is searching  for a remedy for his  ills!  Illness  is of two sorts. 
One sort is real, the other, imaginary. As for the real sort, the All-Wise and Glorious 
Healer has stored up in His mighty pharmacy of the earth a cure for every illness. It is 
licit  to  obtain  medicines  and  use  them  as  treatment,  but one  should  know  that  their 
effect and the cure are from Almighty  God. He both gives the ailment and provides 
the cure. 

Following  the  recommendations  of  skilful,  God-fearing  doctors  is  an  effective 
medicine.  For  most  illnesses  arise  from  abuses,  lack  of  abstinence,  wastefulness, 
mistakes,  dissipation,  and  lack  of  care.  A  religious doctor  will certainly  give  advice 
and instructions within the bounds of the lawful. He will forbid abuses and excesses, 
and give consolation. The  sick person has  confidence  in  his advice  and consolation, 
and his illness lessens; it produces as easiness for him in place of distress. 

But when it comes to imaginary illness, the most effective medicine is to give it 

no importance. The more importance is given to it, the more it grows  

 

281

and swells. If it is disregarded, it lessens and disperses. The more bees are upset the 
more they swarm around a person’s head, but they disperse if no attention is paid to 
them. Similarly, the more importance one pays to a piece of string waving in front of 
one’s eyes  in the darkness and to the apprehension it causes one, the more it  grows 
and makes one flee like a madman. While if one pays it no importance, one sees that 
it is an ordinary bit of string and not a snake, and  laughs at one’s fright and anxiety. 

If  hypochondria  is  chronic,  it  is  transformed  into  reality.  It  is  a  serious  illness 
afflicting the nervous and those given to imaginings; such people make mountains out 
of  molehills  and  their  morale  is  destroyed.  Then  if  they  encounter  unkind  ‘half’ 
doctors or unfair doctors, it further provokes their hypochondria. If they are rich, they 
lose their wealth, or they lose their wits, or their health. 

TWENTY-FIRST REMEDY 

My sick brother! Your illness is accompanied by physical pain. However, you are 
surrounded by a  significant spiritual pleasure that will remove  its  effect. For if  your 
father, mother, and relations  are with  you, their  most pleasurable compassion which 
you  have  forgotten  since  childhood  will  be  reawakened  and  you  will  see  again  the 
kind  looks  you  received  in  childhood.  In  addition,  friendships  envelop  you  that  had 
remained  secret  and  hidden;  these  too  look  towards  you  with  love  through  the 
attraction  of  illness.  In  the  face  of  these,  your  physical  pain  is  reduced  to 
insignificance. Also, you have become a master of the masters since those whom you 
used  to  serve  proudly  now  serve  you  kindly  at  the  decree of  illness.  Moreover,  you 
have attracted towards yourself the fellow-feeling and human kindness in people, and 
so have  found numerous helpful friends and  kind companions. And again,  you have 
received the order from your illness to rest from many taxing duties and are taking a 
rest. For sure, in the face of these immaterial pleasures, your minor pain should drive 
you to thanks, not complaint. 

TWENTY-SECOND REMEDY 

My brother who suffers from a severe illness like apoplexy! Firstly I give you the 
good news that for believers apoplexy is considered blessed. A long time ago I used 
to  hear  this  from  holy  men  and  I  did  not  know  the  reason.  Now,  one  reason  for  it 
occurs to me, as follows: 

In order to attain union with Almighty God, be saved from the spiritual perils of 
this world, and to win eternal happiness, the people of God have chosen to follow two 
principles: 

 

282

The  First  is  contemplation  of  death.  Thinking  that  both  the  world  is  transiory, 
and they themselves are temporary guests charged with duties, they work for eternal 
life in this way. 

The Second: Through fasting, religious exercises and asceticism, they try to kill 
the  evil-commanding  soul  and  so  be  saved  from  its  dangers  and  from  the  blind 
emotions. 

And you, my brother who has lost the health of half his body! Without choosing 
it, you have been given these two principles, which are short and easy and the cause 
of  happiness.  Thus,  the  state  of  your  being  perpetually  warns  you  of  the  fleeting 
nature of the world and that man is transient. The world can no longer drown you, nor 
heedlessness close your eyes. And for sure, the evil-commanding soul cannot deceive 
with lowly lust and animal appetites someone in the state of half a man; he is quickly 
saved from the trials of the soul. 

Thus, through the mystery of belief in God and submission to Him and reliance 
on  Him,  a  believer  can  benefit  in  a  brief  time  from  a  severe  illness  like  apoplexy, 
resembling the severe trials of the saints. A severe illness such as that thus becomes 
exceedingly cheap. 

TWENTY-THIRD REMEDY 

Unhappy ill person who is alone and a stranger! Even if your aloneness and exile 
together with your illness were to arouse sympathy towards you in the hardest hearts 
and  attract  kindness  and  compassion,  could  it  be  a  substitute  for  your  All-
Compassionate Creator? For He presents Himself to us at the start of all the Qur’an’s 
Suras with the attributes of “the Merciful and the Compassionate,” and with one flash 
of  His  compassion  makes  all  mothers  nurture  their  young  with  that  wonderful 
tenderness, and with one manifestation of His mercy every spring fills the face of the 
earth  with  bounties.  Eternal  life  in  Paradise  together  with  all  its  wonders  is  but  a 
single  manifestation  of  His  mercy.  Then  surely  your  relation  to  Him  through  belief, 
your recognizing Him and beseeching Him through the tongue of impotence, arising 
from your illness and the affliction of your loneliness in exile, will attract the glance 
of His mercy towards  you, which takes the place  of everything. Since  He exists and 
He looks to you, everything exists for you. Those who are truly alone and in exile are 
those  who  are  not  connected  with  Him  through  belief  and  submission,  or  attach  no 
importance to that relation. 

 

283

TWENTY-FOURTH REMEDY 

O  you  who  look  after  innocent  sick  children  or  the  elderly,  who  resemble 
innocent children! You have before you important trade for the hereafter. So procure 
it through your enthusiasm and effort! It is established by the people of reality that the 
illnesses of innocent children are like training for their delicate bodies, and injections 
and dominical training to allow them to withstand in the future the upheavals of the 
world; that in addition to many instances of wisdom pertaining to the child’s worldly 
life, instead of the atonement for sins in adults which looks to spiritual life and is the 
means  to  purifying  life,  illnesses  are  like  injections  ensuring  the  child’s  spiritual 
progress  in  the  future  or  in  the  hereafter;  and  that  the  merits  accruing  from  such 
illnesses pass to the book of good works of the parents, and particularly of the mother 
who  through  the  mystery  of  compassion  prefers  the  health  of  her  child  to  her  own 
health. 

As  for  looking  after  the  elderly,  it  is  established  in  sound  narrations  and  many 
historical  events  that  together  with  receiving  huge  reward,  to  receive  the  prayers  of 
the elderly and especially of parents, and to make happy their hearts and serve them 
loyally,  leads  to  happiness  in both  this  world  and  the  next.  And  it  is  established  by 
many events that a fortunate child who obeys to the letter his elderly parents will be 
treated similarly by his children, but if a wretched child wounds his parents he will be 
punished  by  means  of  many disasters  in  this  world  and  in  the  hereafter.  Yes,  Islam 
requires that one looks after not only relatives who are elderly or innocents, but also 
elderly believers if one encounters them – through the mystery of the true brotherhood 
of belief – and that one serves to one’s utmost ability the venerable sick elderly if they 
are in need of it. 

TWENTY-FIFTH REMEDY 

My sick brothers! If you want a most beneficial and truly pleasurable sacred cure, 
strengthen and develop your belief! That is, make use of belief, that sacred cure, and 
of the medicine which arises from belief through repentance and seeking forgiveness, 
and the five daily prayers and worship. 

You as though possess a sick immaterial being as large as the world due to love 
of this world and attachment to it, like the heedless. We have proved in many parts of 
the  Risale-i  Nur  that  belief  at  once  heals  that  immaterial  being  of  yours,  which  is 
bruised  and  battered  by  the  blows  of  death  and  separation,  and  saves  it  from  the 
wounds and truly heals it. But I cut short the discussion here so as not to weary you. 

 

284

As  for  the  medicine  of  belief,  it  shows  its  effect  when  you  carry  out  your 
religious obligations as far as is possible. Heedlessness, vice, the lusts of the soul, and 
illicit  amusements  reduce  its  effectiveness.  Illness  dispels  heedlessness,  cuts  the 
appetites, is an obstacle to illicit pleasures, so take advantage of  it. Make use of the 
sacred medicines and lights of belief through repentance and seeking forgiveness, and 
prayer and supplication. 

May Almighty God restore you to health and make  your illnesses atonement for 

your  sins. Amen. Amen. Amen. 

And they say: All praise be to God Who has guided us to this; never could we 
have found guidance if it had not for been the guidance of God; indeed, the 
Messengers of our Sustainer did bring the truth.(7:43) 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

O  God!  Grant  blessings  to  our  master  Muhammad,  the  medicine  for  our 
hearts and their remedy, the good health of our bodies and their healing, the 
light of our eyes and their radiance, and to his Family and Companions, and 
grant them peace. 

Addendum to the Twenty-Fifth Flash 
 
This is the Seventeenth Letter, which  having been  included in the Mektûbat (Letters 
1928-1932), has not been included here. 

*   *   * 

 
 
 

 
 
 
*   *   * 

 
 
 
 

 

 

285

The Twenty-Sixth Flash 

Treatise For The Elderly 

 [This Flash consists of twenty-six hopes, lights, and solaces.1] 

REMINDER: The reason I have described my sorrows and afflictions at the 
beginning  of  each  Hope  in  a  truly  grievous  way  that  will  sadden  you  is  in 
order to  show  the  extraordinary  efficaciousness  of  the  remedies  proceeding 
from  the  All-Wise  Qur’an.  This  Flash,  concerning  the  elderly,  has  been 
unable to preserve its beauty of expression in three or four respects: 
The  First:  It  is  about  my  life  the  events  of  which  I  revisited  in  my 
imagination;  it  was  written  in  the  state  of  mind  of  those  times.  It  was  not 
possible,  therefore,  to  preserve  an  orderly  arrangement  in  the  way  it  is  set 
out.  
The Second: It was written at a time I felt extreme fatigue, after the morning 
prayers,  and  I  was  also  compelled  to  write  it  at  speed;  its  manner  of 
expression therefore became confused. 
The Third: There was not always someone with me to write, and the scribe 
who generally accompanied me had four or five other duties connected with 
the Risale-i Nur. We therefore could not find sufficient time to correct it and 
it remained in a disordered state. 
The  Fourth:  We  were  both  tired  after  its  composition,  and  not  thinking 
carefully  of  the  meaning,  made  do  with  correcting  it  only  superficially;  so 
there  are  bound  to  be  faults  in  the  manner  of  expression.  I  request  the 
generous elderly to look tolerantly on such errors and to include us in their 
prayers  when  they  raise their  hands  to  the  divine  court,  since  divine  mercy 
does not reject the prayers of the blessed elderly. 

                                                 

1 It is written in a handwritten copy of this Flash corrected by the respected author: “The 
remaining Hopes, from the Fourteenth to the Twenty-Sixth, have not been written due to the well-
known calamity (Eskişehir Prison); the time of writing them having passed now, it has remained 
without them.” (The Fourteenth to the Sixteenth were composed subsequently. Tr.) 

 

286

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Kaf. Ha. Ya. ‘Ain. Sad. * [This is] a recital of the mercy of your Sustainer to 
His  servant  Zakariya.  *  Behold!  he  cried  to  His  Sustainer  in  secret,  * 
Praying: “O my Sustainer! Infirm indeed are my bones, and the hair of my 
head  glistens  with  grey;  but  I  am  never  unblest,  O  my  Sustainer,  in  my 
prayer to you.”(19:1-4) 

FIRST HOPE 

Respected elderly brothers and sisters who have reached maturity! Like you, I am 
elderly. I am going to write the ‘hopes’ I have found in my old age and some of the 
things  that  have  befallen  me,  out  of  the  desire  to  share  with  you  the  lights  of 
consolation they contain. Of course the lights I have seen and the doors of hope I have 
encountered  have  been  seen  and  opened  in  accordance  with  my  defective  and 
confused abilities. God willing, your pure, sincere dispositions will make those lights 
shine more brightly and strengthen the hopes I have found. 

Thus, the spring, source and fount of the  following  hopes and lights  is belief  in 

God. 

SECOND HOPE 

One  day  as  I  was  entering  upon  old  age,  in  the  autumn  at  the  time  of  the 
afternoon prayer,  I was  gazing  on  the  world  from  a high  mountain.  Suddenly  I was 
overwhelmed  by  a  plaintive,  sorrowful  and  in  one  respect dark  state  of mind. I  saw 
that I had become old. The day too had grown old, and so had the year; so too had the 
world become old. As the time of departure from the world and separation from those 
I loved was drawing close within these instances  of old age, my own old age shook 
me severely. Suddenly divine mercy unfolded in such a way that it transformed that 
plaintive sadness and separation into a powerful hope and shining light of solace. Yes, 
you who are elderly like myself! The All-Compassionate Creator presents himself to 
us in a hundred places in the All-Wise Qur’an as the Most Merciful of the Merciful, 
and  always  sends  His  mercy  to  the  assistance  of  living  creatures  on  the  face  of  the 
earth who seek it, and every year fills the spring with innumerable bounties and gifts 
from the Unseen, sending them to us who are needy for sustenance, and manifests His 
mercy in greater abundance relatively to our weakness and impotence. For us in our 
old age, therefore, His mercy is our greatest hope and most powerful light. It may be 
obtained  by  forming  a  relation  with  the  Most  Merciful  One  through  belief,  and 
performing the five daily prayers, by being obedient to Him. 

 

287

THIRD HOPE 

One time when I awoke in the morning of old age from the sleep of the night of 
youth  I  looked  at  myself  and  saw  that  my  life  was  hastening  towards  the  grave  as 
though racing down a slope. As Niyazi Misri said: 

Each day a stone from the building of my life falls to the ground; 
Heedless one! You slumber, unaware that the building is in ruins! 
My body, my spirit’s dwelling, was becoming dilapidated with every day a stone 
of it falling away. My hopes and ambitions which bound me strongly to the world had 
begun  to  be  broken  off  from  it.  I  felt  that  the  time  I  would  be  separated  from  my 
innumerable  friends  and  those  I  loved  was  drawing  near.  I  searched  for  a  salve  for 
that  deep  and  apparently  incurable  spiritual  wound,  but  I  could  not  find  one.  Again 
like Niyazi Misri I said: 

While my heart desired its immortality, Reality required the passing of my body; 
I am afflicted with an incurable ill, which even Luqman could not cure!2 
Then  suddenly  the  light  and  intercession  of  the  Glorious  Prophet  (UWBP),  the 
tongue,  model,  exemplar,  herald,  and  representative  of  divine  compassion,  and  the 
gift of guidance he brought to mankind, soothed and healed the wound I had supposed 
to be incurable and endless. 

Yes, respected elderly men and women who feel their old age like I do! We are 
departing, there is no use in deceiving ourselves. Even if we close our eyes to it, we 
will  not  remain  here.  There  is  a  mobilization.  The  land  of  the  Intermediate  Realm, 
which  appears  to  us  to  be  dark  and  full  of  separation  due  to  the  gloomy  delusions 
which  arise  from  heedlessness  and  in  part  from  the  people  of  misguidance,  is  the 
meeting-place  of  friends.  It  is  the  world  where  we  shall  meet  with  foremost  God’s 
Beloved (Upon whom be blessings and peace), and with all our friends. 

We  are  going  to  the  world  of  the  one  who  every  year  for  one  thousand  three 
hundred  and  fifty  years  has  been  the  ruler  of  one  thousand  three  hundred  and  fifty 
million  people,  and  the  trainer  of  their  spirits,  the  teacher  of  their  minds,  and  the 
beloved of their hearts; to whose book of good works, in accordance with the meaning 
of “the cause is like the doer,” is every day added the equivalent of all the good works 
performed  by  his  community;  who  is  the  means  by  which  the  elevated  divine 
purposes in the universe are accomplished and the high value of beings are realized. 
When he came into the world, according to authentic narrations and accurate divining 
of  

                                                 

2 That is to say, although with all its strength my heart wanted my body to be immortal, divine 
wisdom necessitated its destruction. I was afflicted with an incurable ill for which even Luqman the 
Wise could find no solution. 

 

288

reality,  he  exclaimed:  “My  community!  My  community!”  So  too  at  the  Last 
Judgement  when  everyone  thinks  only  of  themselves,  he  will  again  declare:  “My 
community! My community!”, and with sacred, elevated self-sacrifice hasten with his 
intercession to its assistance. We are going to such a world, illuminated by the stars of 
countless saints and purified scholars revolving around that Sun (UWBP). 

Thus, the way to share in that Being’s (UWBP) intercession and profit from his 
light,  and  be  saved  from  the  darkness  of  the  Intermediate  Realm,  is  to  follow  his 
glorious practices. 

FOURTH HOPE 

At  the  time  I  approached  old  age,  my  physical  health,  which  perpetuates 
heedlessness, was broken. Old age and illness attacked me in concert. Hitting me over 
the head, they chased away sleep. I had nothing to bind me to the world like family, 
children,  and  possessions.  Having  wasted  the  fruits  of  my  life’s  the  capital  on  the 
giddiness of  youth, I  saw them to consist only of sins and mistakes. Crying out like 
Niyazi Misri, I said: 

I had concluded no trade; the capital of life was all lost; 
I came to the road to find the caravan had moved on, unaware. 
Lamenting, I continued down the road, all alone, a stranger; 
My eyes weeping, my heart in anguish, my mind bewildered, unaware. 
I  was  in  exile  at  the  time;  I  felt  a  despairing  sorrow,  a  regretful  penitence,  a 
longing  for  assistance.  Suddenly,  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  came  to  my  aid.  It  opened  a 
door of hope so powerful and afforded a light of consolation so true that it could have 
dispelled despair and darknesses a hundred times more intense than mine. 

Yes, respected elderly men and women whose attachment to the world has begun 
to  be  sundered  and  the  ties  binding  them  to  be  broken!  Is  it  possible  that  the  All-
Glorious Maker who creates this world as a perfectly ordered city or palace would not 
speak  with  his  most  important  guests  and  friends or  not  meet  with  them?  Since  He 
knowingly made the palace and ordered and adorned it through His will and choice, 
certainly as one who makes knows, so one who knows will speak. Since He made this 
palace and city into a fine guesthouse and place of trade for us, He will surely have a 
book, a file, to explain His relations with us and what He desires from us. 

The  most  holy  of  such  Books  is  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition;  it  is  a 
miracle  in  forty  respects  and  is  every  instant  on  the  tongues  of  at  least  a  hundred 
million people; it scatters light, and every letter of it affords at  

 

289

least  ten  merits  and  rewards,  and  fruits  of  Paradise  and  lights  in  the  Intermediate 
Realm,  and  sometimes  ten  thousand,  and  sometimes  –  through  the  mystery  of  the 
Night of Power – thirty thousand. There is no book in the universe to compete with it 
in this respect and no one could put one forward. Since this Qur’an which we have is 
the Word of the All-Glorious Creator of the heavens and earth, proceeding from His 
absolute dominicality, the tremendousness of His Godhead, and His all-encompassing 
mercy, and is His decree and a source of His mercy; adhere to it. In it are found a cure 
for every ill, a light for every darkness, and a hope for all despair. And the key to this 
eternal  treasury  is  belief  and  submission  to  God,  and  listening  to  the  Qur’an  and 
accepting it, and reciting it. 

FIFTH HOPE 

One  time  at  the  start  of  my  old  age  when  I  desired  solitude,  I  retired  to  Yuşa 
Tepesi, Mount Joshua, away up the Istanbul Bosphorus. My spirit was seeking ease in 
loneliness. One day on that  high  hill, I gazed around me at the broad horizon, and I 
cast  a  glance from the  high  position  of  the  forty-fifth  branch,  that  is,  the  forty-fifth 
year of the tree of my life to its lower levels. I saw that down on the lower branches of 
each  year  were  the  countless  corpses  of  those  I  had  known  and  had  loved  and  with 
whom  I  had  been  connected.  I  felt  a  truly  piteous  sorrow  at  their  parting  and 
separation, I wept like Fuzuli Baghdadi for the friends from whom I was parted: 

As I recall their company I weep, 
So long as there is breath in this dry body, I cry out. 

I  sought  a  solace,  a  light,  a  door  leading  to  hope.  Suddenly  belief  in  the  hereafter 
came to my assistance, shedding an  inextinguishable light, offering an  indestructible 
hope. 

Yes, my brothers and sisters who are elderly  like me! Since the  hereafter exists 
and it is everlasting, and it is a better world than this; and since the One who created 
us  is  both  All-Wise  and All-Compassionate; we should not complain and regret our 
old age. On the contrary, we should be happy at it in so far as with age one reaches 
perfect maturity through worship and belief, and it is a sign one will be released from 
the duties of life and depart for the world of mercy in order to rest. 

According  to  narrations,  some  relying  on  witnessing  and  some  on  ‘absolute 
certainty’,  mankind’s  most  eminent  individuals,  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-four 
thousand prophets,3 have unanimously given news of the  

                                                 

al-Ma‘ad (tahqiq: al-Arnavud) i, 43-4. 

3 Musnad, v, 266; Wali al-Din Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih, iii, 122; Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawzi, Zad 

 

290

existence of the hereafter, and that men will be sent there and the universe’s Creator 
will  bring  it  about  in  accordance  with  His  certain  promise.  Similarly,  affirming 
through  illumination  and  witnessing  in  the  form  of  ‘certainty  at  the  degree  of 
knowledge’  the  reports  of  the  prophets,  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-four  million 
saints have testified to the hereafter’s existence. And through the manifestations they 
display  in this world, all the  names of the universe’s All-Wise Maker self-evidently 
necessitate  an  everlasting  realm.  So  too  the  infinite  pre-eternal  power  and  the 
boundless  eternal  wisdom  which  allowing  nothing  to  be  vain  and purposeless  every 
year in the spring, raise to life with the command of “‘Be!’ and it is”(36:83, etc.) the 
incalculable corpses of the dead trees on the face of the earth, making them manifest 
life after death, and revivify three hundred thousand species of plants and animals as 
thousands of samples of the resurrection of the dead. These observedly necessitate the 
existence of the hereafter, as does the eternal mercy and perpetual favour which with 
perfect  compassion  and  in  wondrous  fashion  provide  the  livelihoods  of  all  living 
beings  needy  for  sustenance  and  in  a  brief  time  in  spring  display  their  uncountable 
sorts of adornment and decoration; they too necessitate the existence of the hereafter. 
Together with man, the most perfect fruit of the universe and its Creator’s most loved 
creature,  who  of  all  beings  is  the  most  closely  concerned  with  the  beings  in  the 
universe,  and  the clear indications  and  certain  evidence  of  his  intense,  unshakeable, 
constant  desire  for  immortality  and  his  hopes  which  extend  to  eternity  –  all  these 
prove  so  decisively  that  after  this  transient  world  there  will  be  an  eternal  world,  a 
realm  of  the  hereafter  and  everlasting  happiness  that  they  self-evidently  necessitate 
acceptance of the hereafter’s existence.4  

Since  the  most  important  thing  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  teaches  us  is  belief  in  the 
hereafter, and since this belief is thus powerful and it yields such hope and solace that 
if  a  person  was  overwhelmed  by  old  age  a  hundred  thousand  times  over,  the 
consolation arising from this belief would be  

                                                 

4 The ease of reporting a definite matter and the difficulty in denying it may be seen in the 
following comparison: if one person says: “There is a wondrous garden on earth whose trees produce 
fruits which are cans of milk,” and another says: “There isn’t,” the one claiming it only has to point out 
where it is or some of its fruits in order to easily prove it. Whereas the one denying can only prove his 
denial by seeing and showing the whole face of the earth. In just the same way, even if one disregards 
the hundreds of thousands of signs, fruits, and marks of Paradise which those who give news of it have 
indicated, the testimony of two truthful witnesses to its certain existence is sufficient; while the one 
who denies it can only prove his denial after observing the infinite universe and infinite, unending time, 
and seeing it and investigating it exhaustively; only then can he demonstrate its non-existence. And so, 
my elderly brothers, you may understand just how powerful is belief in the hereafter. 

 

291

sufficient to face it; for sure we elderly people should love our old age and say: “All 
praise be to God for perfect belief!” 

SIXTH HOPE 

One  time  during  my  distressing  captivity,  I  was  alone  on the  top of  Çam Da€›, 
the Pine Mountain, in the mountains of Barla, having withdrawn from the company of 
men. I was searching for a light in my loneliness. One night on the small platform at 
the top of a tall pine-tree on the summit of that high mountain, old age recalled to me 
three  or  four  exiles,  one  within  the  other.  As  is  described  in  the  Sixth  Letter,  the 
melancholy sound of the rustling, murmuring trees on that lonely, silent, distant night 
affected  me  grievously  in  my  old  age  and  exile.  Old  age  gave  me  the  following 
thought:  like  the  day  changed  into  this  black  grave  and  the  world  donned  its  black 
shroud, the daytime of your life, too, will turn into night, and the daytime of the world 
turn  into  the  night  of  the  Intermediate  Realm,  and  summertime  of  life  will  be 
transformed into the winter nighttime of death. It whispered this in my heart’s ear. My 
soul was then obliged to say:  

Yes,  I  am  far  from  my  native  land,  but  being  separated  from  all  those  I  have 
loved during my fifty years’ lifetime who have died, and remaining weeping for them, 
is a far more grievous and sorrowful exile than the exile from my country. Moreover, 
I am drawing close to a much sadder and more painful exile than the melancholy exile 
of the night and the mountain: old age informs me that I am approaching the time of 
separation from the world. I then sought a  light,  a  hope from these sorrowful exiles 
one within the other. Suddenly belief in God came to my assistance and afforded such 
a  familiarity  that  even  if  the  compounded  desolation  in  which  I  found  myself 
increased a thousandfold, its consolation would have been sufficient. 

Elderly men and women! Since we  have a Compassionate Creator, there can be 
no exile for us! Since He exists, everything exists for us. Since He exists, the angels 
exist.  The  world  is  not  empty.  Lonely  mountains  and  empty  deserts  are  full  of 
Almighty God’s servants. Apart from His conscious servants, stones and trees become 
like  familiar  friends  when  seen  through  His  light  and  on  His  account.  They  may 
converse with us and give us enjoyment. 

Yes, evidences and witnesses to the number of beings in the universe and to the 
number of the letters of this vast book of the world testify to the existence of our All-
Compassionate,  Munificent,  Intimate,  Loving  Creator,  Maker,  and  Protector;  they 
show us His mercy to the number of living creatures’ members, foods, and bounties, 
which may be a means of receiving  

 

292

His compassion, mercy, and favour, and indicate His court. Impotence and weakness 
are the most acceptable intercessor at His court. And old age is precisely the time of 
impotence and weakness. So one should not feel resentful at old age, which is thus an 
acceptable intercessor at a court, but love it. 

SEVENTH HOPE 

One time at the start of my old age when the laughter of the Old Said was being 
transformed into the weeping of the New Said, supposing me still to be the Old Said, 
the worldly in Ankara invited me there, and I went. At the close of autumn I climbed 
to the top of the citadel, which was far more aged, dilapidated, and worn out than me. 
It seemed to me to be formed of petrified historical events. The old age of the season 
of the year together with my old age, the citadel’s old age, mankind’s old age, the old 
age  of  the  glorious  Ottoman  Empire,  and  the  death  of  the  Caliphate’s  rule,  and  the 
world’s old age all caused me to look in a most grieved, piteous and melancholy state 
in  that  lofty  citadel  at  the  valleys  of  the  past  and  the  mountains  of  the  future.  As  I 
experienced  an  utterly  black  state  of  mind  in  Ankara  encompassed  by  four  or  five 
layers of the darknesses of old age one within the other,5 I sought a light, a solace, a 
hope. 

As  I  sought  consolation  looking  to  the  right,  that  is,  to  the  past,  my  father  and 
forefathers  and  the  human  race  appeared  in  the  form  of  a  vast  grave  and  filled  me 
with gloom rather than consoling me. Seeking a remedy I looked to the future, which 
was  to  my  left.  I  saw  that  it  appeared  as  a  huge,  dark  grave  for  myself,  my 
contemporaries,  and  future  generations;  it  produced  horror  in  place  of  familiarity. 
Feeling  desolate  in  the  face  of  the  left  and  right,  I  looked  at  the  present  day.  It 
appeared  to  my  heedless,  historical  eye  as  a  coffin  bearing  my  half-dead,  suffering 
and  desperately  struggling  corpse.  So  despairing  of  that  direction  too,  I  raised  my 
head and looked at the top of the tree of my life, and there was my corpse; it stood at 
the top of the tree and was watching me. Feeling horror at this direction, too, I bowed 
my head. I looked to the foot of the tree of my life, to its roots, and saw that the soil 
there, the earth which was the source of my creation and the dust of my bones mixed 
together,  was  being  trampled underfoot.  That  was  no  remedy,  it  only  added  further 
pain to my affliction. 

Then I was forced to look behind me. I saw that this unstable, transient world was 

tumbling, disappearing, into the valleys of nothingness and the  

                                                 

Ankara, in a treatise entitled, Hubab. 

5 My state of mind at that time prompted me to write a supplication in Persian. It was printed in 

 

293

darkness  of  non-existence.  I  was  seeking  a  salve  for  my  pain,  but  it  only  added 
poison. Since I could see no good in that direction I looked in front of me, I sent my 
view  forward  to  the  future.  I  saw  that  the  door  of  the  grave  was  open  right  in  the 
middle of my path; it was watching me with its mouth agape. The highway beyond it 
which stretched away to eternity, and the convoys travelling that highway, struck the 
eye  from  the  distance.  But  apart  from  a  limited  will  as  my  support  and  defensive 
weapon in the face of the horrors coming from these six directions, I had nothing. 

The  faculty of will, man’s only weapon against those  innumerable enemies and 
endless harmful things, is both defective, and short, and weak, and lacks the power to 
create, so he is capable of nothing apart from ‘acquisition.’ It could neither pass to the 
past  in  order  to  silence  the  sorrows  which  came  to  me  from  there,  nor  could  it 
penetrate the future to prevent the fears which arose from there. I saw that it was of no 
benefit for my hopes and pains concerning the past and future.  

As  I  was  struggling  in  the  horror,  desolation,  darkness  and  despair  proceeding 
from these six directions, the lights of belief which shine in the sky of the Qur’an of 
Miraculous Exposition suddenly  came to my assistance. They lit up and illuminated 
those  six  directions  to  such  a  degree  that  if  the  terrors  and  darkness  I  had  seen 
increased a hundredfold, the light would still have been sufficient to meet them. One 
by one it transformed all those horrors into solace and the desolation into familiarity. 
It was as follows: 

Belief rent  asunder the desolate  view of the past  as a  vast grave, and showed it 

with utter certainty to be a familiar, enlightened gathering of friends. 

And belief showed the future, which had appeared in the form of a huge grave to 
my  heedless  eyes,  to  be  most  certainly  a  banquet  of  the  Most  Merciful  One  in 
delightful palaces of bliss. 

And  belief  rent  the  view  of  present  time  as  a  coffin,  as  it  had  appeared  to  my 
heedless view, and showed it with certainty to be a place of trade for the hereafter and 
a glittering guesthouse of the All-Merciful One. 

And belief showed with utter certainty that the only fruit at the top of the tree of 
life was not a corpse as had appeared to my neglectful eye, but that my spirit, which 
would manifest eternal life and was designated for eternal happiness, would leave its 
worn-out home to travel around the stars. 

And through its mystery, belief showed that my bones and the earth that was the 
source  of  my  creation  were  not  valueless  pulverized  bones  trampled  underfoot,  but 
that the earth was the door to divine mercy and veil before the halls of Paradise. 
And through the mystery of the Qur’an, belief showed that the world  

 

294

which had appeared to my heedless eye as tumbling behind me into nothingness and 
non-existence  to  consist  of  missives  of  the  Eternally  Besought  One  and  pages  of 
decorations and embroideries glorifying God which had completed their duties, stated 
their meanings, and left their results in existence  in their place. It made known with 
complete certainty the true nature of the world. 

And  through  the  light  of  the  Qur’an, belief  showed  that  the  grave  which  would 
open its eyes and look at me in the future was not the mouth of a well, but that it was 
the door to the world of light, and that the highway which stretched to eternity beyond 
it  led  not  to  nothingness  and  non-existence,  but  to  existence,  a  realm  of  light,  and 
eternal  bliss.  Since  belief  demonstrated  this  to  a  degree  which  afforded  utter 
conviction, it was both a remedy and a salve for my afflictions. 

And in place of a  very  minor ability to receive,  belief puts a document into the 
hand of the limited faculty of will through which it may rely on an infinite power and 
be  connected  to  a  boundless  mercy  in  the  face  of  those  innumerable  enemies  and 
layers  of  darkness.  Indeed,  belief  is  a  document  in  the  hand  of  man’s  will,  and 
although this  human weapon of will  is  in  itself both short, powerless, and deficient, 
just as when a soldier utilizes his partial strength on account of the state, he performs 
duties  far  exceeding  his  own  strength,  so  too  through  the  mystery  of  belief,  if  the 
limited faculty of will  is used in the  name of Almighty God and in  His way,  it may 
gain also a paradise as broad as five hundred years. 

And belief takes from the hands of the body the reins of the faculty of will, which 
cannot penetrate  to  the  past  and  future,  and  hands  them  over  to  the  heart  and  spirit. 
Since  the  sphere  of  their  life  is  not  restricted  to  present  time  like  the  body,  and 
included within it are a great many years from the past and a great many  years from 
the  future,  the  will  ceases  being  limited  and  acquires  universality.  Through  the 
strength of belief it may enter the deepest valleys of the past and repel the darkness of 
its sorrows; so too with the light of belief it may rise as far as the farthest mountains 
of the future, and remove its fears. 

My elderly brothers and sisters who are suffering the difficulties of old age like 
myself! Since, praise be to God, we are believers, and in belief are  found this many 
luminous,  pleasurable,  agreeable,  and  gratifying  treasures;  and  since  our  old  age 
impels us even more to the contents of the treasure, for sure, rather than complaining 
about old age accompanied by belief, we should offer endless thanks. 

 

295

EIGHTH HOPE 

At a time grey hairs, the sign of old age, were appearing in my hair, the turmoil 
of  the  First  World  War,  which  made  even  heavier  the  deep  sleep  of  youth,  the 
upheaval of my captivity as a prisoner-of-war, the position of great fame and honour 
accorded  to  me  on  my  return  to  Istanbul,  and  the  kind  treatment  and  attention  far 
exceeding my due I received from everyone, from the Caliph, even, Shaykh al-Islam, 
and Commander-in-Chief of the Army to the students of religion, the intoxication of 
youth, and the mental state produced by my position all made the  sleep of  youth so 
heavy  that  I  quite  simply  saw  the  world  as  permanent  and  myself  in  a  wonderful 
undying situation cemented to it. 

Then  one  day  in  Ramadan  I  went  to  Bayezid  Mosque  to  listen  to  the  sincere 
Qur’an  reciters.  With  their  tongues,  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  was 
proclaiming with its exalted heavenly address the decree of: 

Every living creature shall taste death,(3:185, etc.) 

which  powerfully  gives  news  of  man’s  death  and  that  of  all  animate  creatures.  It 
entered  my  ear,  penetrated  to  the  depths  of  my  heart  and  established  itself  there;  it 
shattered my profound sleep and heedlessness. I went out of the mosque. Because of 
the stupor of the sleep which for a long time had settled in my head, for several days a 
tempest  raged  in  it,  and  I  saw  myself  as  a  boat  with  smoking  boilers  and  compass 
spinning. Every time I looked at my hair in the mirror, the grey hairs told me: “Take 
note of us!” And so the situation became clear through the warnings of my grey hairs. 
I looked and saw that my youth which so captivated me with its pleasures and in 
which I so trusted was bidding me farewell, and that this worldly life which I so loved 
and  with  which  I  was  so  involved  was  beginning  to  be  extinguished,  and  that  the 
world with which I was closely connected and of which I was quite simply the lover 
was  saying  to  me:  “Have  a  good  journey!”,  and  was  warning  me  that  I  would  be 
leaving this guesthouse. It too was saying “Good-bye,” and was preparing to depart. 
The following meaning was unfolding in my heart from the indications of the Qur’an 
of Miraculous Exposition’s verse, 

Every living creature shall taste death: 

the human race is a living creature; it shall die in order to be resurrected. The globe of 
the earth is a living creature; it also will die in order to take on an eternal form. The 
world too is a living creature; it will die in order to assume the form of the hereafter. 

While  in  this  state,  I  considered  my  situation.  I  saw  that  youth,  which  is  the 

source of pleasure, was departing; while old age, the source of sorrow,  

 

296

was  approaching;  that  life,  which  is  so  shining  and  luminous,  was  taking  its  leave; 
while death, which is terrifying and apparently darkness, was preparing to arrive; and 
that  the  lovable  world,  which  is  thought  to  be  permanent  and  is  the  beloved  of  the 
heedless, was hastening to its decease. 

In  order  to  deceive  myself  and  again  plunge  my  head  into  heedlessness  I 
considered the  pleasures  of  the  social  standing  I  enjoyed  in  Istanbul,  which  was  far 
higher  than  I  deserved,  but  there  was  no  advantage  in  it  at  all.  All  the  regard, 
attention, and consolation of people could only accompany me as far as the looming 
door  of  the  grave;  there  it  would  be  extinguished.  Since  I  saw  it  to  be  a  tedious 
hypocrisy,  cold  conceit,  and  temporary  stupefaction  under  the  embellished  veil  of 
glory  and  renown,  which  is the  illusory  aim  of  those  who  chase  fame,  I  understood 
that these things which had until then deceived me could provide me with no solace, 
there was no light to be found in them at all. 

I  again  started  to  listen  to  the  reciters  in  Bayezid  Mosque  in  order  to  hear  the 
Qur’an’s heavenly teaching, and to awaken once more. From its sublime instruction I 
heard good news through sacred decrees of the sort, 

And give glad tidings to those who believe.(2:25, etc.) 
With  its  effulgence,  I  sought  consolation,  hope,  and  light,  within  the  points  at 
which I had felt horror, desolation and despair, not outside them. Endless thanks be to 
Almighty God, I found the cure within the malady itself, I found the light within the 
darkness itself, I found the solace within the horror itself. 

Firstly,  I  looked in the face of death, which  is imagined to be most terrible and 
terrifies everyone. Through the light of the Qur’an I saw that although its veil is black, 
dark, and ugly, for believers its true face is luminous and beautiful. We have proved 
this truth decisively in many parts of the Risale-i Nur. For example, as we explained 
in the Eighth Word and the Twentieth Letter, death is not annihilation and separation, 
but  the  introduction  to  eternal  life,  its  beginning.  It  is  a  rest  from  the  hardships  of 
life’s  duties,  a  demobilization.  It  is  a  change  of  residence.  It  is  to  meet  with  the 
caravan of one’s friends who have already migrated to the Intermediate World; and so 
on. I saw death’s true, beautiful face through truths like these. I looked at death’s face 
not  with  fear,  but  with  a  sort  of  longing.  I  understood  one  meaning  of  the  Sufis’ 
contemplation of death. 

Then I considered my departed youth – youth, which makes everyone weep on its 
passing, which infatuates them and fills them with desire, causing them to pass it  in 
sin  and  heedlessness.  I  saw  that  within  its  beautiful  embroidered  garb  was  an  ugly, 
drunken, stupified face. Had I not learnt its  

 

297

true  nature,  it  would  have  made  me  weep  for  a  hundred  years  if  I  remained  in  the 
world that long, instead of intoxicating and amusing me for a few  years. Just as one 
such peson said lamenting:  

“If only one day my  youth would return, I would tell it of the woes old age has 

brought me.” 

Indeed, elderly people like the above who do not know the true nature of youth, 
think of their own youth, and weep with regret and longing. But when youth belongs 
to  believers  with  sound  minds  and  hearts,  it  is  a  most  powerful,  agreeable  and 
pleasant  means  of  securing  good  works  and  trade  for  the  hereafter,  so  long  as  they 
spend it on worship, and that trade and those good works. For those who know their 
religious duties and do not misspend their youth, it is a precious and delightful divine 
bounty.  But  when  it  is  not  spent  in  moderation,  uprightness,  and  fear  of  God,  it 
contains  many  dangers;  it  damages  eternal  happiness  and  the  life  of  this  world.  In 
return for the pleasures of one or two years’ youth, in old age it causes many years of 
grief and sorrow. 

Since for most people youth is harmful, we elderly people should thank God that 
we have been saved from its dangers and harm. Like everything else, the pleasures of 
youth depart. If they have been spent on worship and good works, the fruits of such a 
youth remain perpetually in their place and are the means of gaining youth in eternal 
life. 

Next, I considered the world, with which most people are infatuated and to which 
they are addicted. Through the  light of the Qur’an, I saw that  it has three  faces, one 
within the other: 

The First looks to the divine names; it is a mirror to them 
Its Second Face looks to the hereafter, and is its tillage. 
Its Third Face  looks to the worldly; it is the playground of the heedless. 
Moreover, everyone has his own vast world within this world. Simply, there are 
worlds  one  within  the  other  to  the  number  of  human  beings.  The  pillar  of  each 
person’s private world is his own life. If his body gives way, his world collapses on 
his head, it is doomsday for him. Since the heedless and neglectful do not realize that 
their  world  will  be  so  quickly  destroyed,  they  suppose  it  to  be  permanent  like  the 
general world and worship it. I thought to myself: “I too have a private world that will 
swiftly  collapse  and  be  demolished  like  the  worlds  of  other  people.  What  value  is 
there in this private world, this brief life of mine?” 

Then,  through  the  light  of  the  Qur’an,  I  saw  that  both  for  myself  and  everyone 
else, this world is a temporary place of trade, a guesthouse which is every day filled 
and emptied, a market set up on the road for the passers- 

 

298

by  to  shop  in,  an  ever-renewed  notebook  of  the  Pre-Eternal  Inscriber  which  is 
constantly written and erased, and every spring is a gilded letter, and every summer a 
well-composed  ode;  that  it  is  formed  of  mirrors  reflecting  and  renewing  the 
manifestations  of  the  All-Glorious  Maker’s  names;  is  a  seed-bed  of  the  hereafter,  a 
flower-bed  of  divine  mercy,  and  a  special,  temporary  workshop  for  producing 
signboards which will be displayed in the world of eternity. 

I  offered  a  hundred  thousand  thanks to the  All-Glorious  Creator  who  had  made 
the world in this way. And I understood that while love for the beautiful, inner faces 
of the world which look to the hereafter and divine names had been given to mankind, 
since they spent  it on  its transient, ugly, harmful, heedless  face, they manifested the 
meaning of the Hadith: “Love of this world is the chief of all errors.”6 

Elderly people! I realized this truth through the light of the All-Wise Qur’an, and 
the warnings of my old age, and belief opening my eyes. And I have demonstrated it 
with decisive proofs in many places  in the Risale-i Nur. I experienced a true solace, 
powerful hope, and shining light. I was thankful for my old age, and I was happy that 
my  youth had gone. You too do not weep, but offer thanks. Since there is belief and 
the truth is thus, it should be the heedless who weep and the misguided who lament. 

NINTH HOPE 

In the First World War, as a prisoner, I was in the distant province of Kosturma 
in north-eastern Russia. There was a small mosque belonging to the Tatars beside the 
famous River Volga. I used to become wearied among my friends, the other officers. I 
craved solitude, yet I could not wander about outside without permission. Then they 
took me on bail to the Tatar quarter, to that small mosque on the banks of the Volga. I 
used  to  sleep  there,  alone.  Spring  was  close.  I  used  to  be  very  wakeful  during  the 
long, long nights of that northern land; the sad plashing of the Volga and the mirthless 
patter of the rain and the melancholy sighing of the wind of those dark nights in that 
dark exile had temporarily roused me from a deep sleep of heedlessness. I did not yet 
consider  myself  old,  but  those  who  had  experienced  the  Great  War  were  old.  For 
those were days that, as though manifesting the verse:  

A day that will turn the hair of children grey,(73:17)  

made even children old. While I was forty years old, I felt myself to be  

                                                 

6 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, No: 1099; al-Suyuti, al-Durar al-Muntathira, 97; Isfahani, Hilyat 

al-Awliya’, vi, 388; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, iii, 368, No: 3662. 

 

299

eighty.  In  those  long,  dark  nights  and  sorrowful  exile  and  melancholic  state,  I 
despaired of life and of my  homeland. I  looked at my powerlessness  and aloneness, 
and my hope failed. 

Then, while  in that state, succour arrived from the All-Wise Qur’an; my tongue 

said:  

God is enough for us; and how excellent a guardian is He.(3:173) 

And weeping, my heart cried out: “I am a stranger, I am alone, I am weak, I am 

powerless: I seek mercy, I seek forgiveness, I seek help from You, O my God!” 

And, thinking of my old friends in my homeland, and imagining myself dying in 

exile there, like Niyazi Misri, my spirit poured forth these lines: 

Fleeing the world’s grief, 
Taking flight with ardour and longing, 
Opening my wings to the void, 
Crying with each breath, Friend! Friend! 

It was searching for its friends. 

Anyway,  my  weakness  and  impotence  became  such  potent  intercessors  and 
means at the divine court on that melancholy, pitiful, separation-afflicted, long night 
in  exile  that  now  I  still  wonder  at  it.  For  several  days  later  I  escaped  in  the  most 
unexpected manner, on my own, not knowing  Russian, across a distance that would 
have taken a year on foot. I was saved in a wondrous fashion through divine favour, 
which was bestowed as a consequence of my weakness and impotence. Then, passing 
through  Warsaw  and  Austria,  I  reached  Istanbul,  so  that  to  be  saved  in  this  way  so 
easily was  quite  extraordinary.  I  completed  the  long  flight  with  an  ease  and  facility 
the  boldest  and  most  cunning  Russian-speakers  could  not  have 
that  even 
accomplished. 

That night in the mosque on the banks of the Volga made me decide to pass the 
rest  of  my  life  in  caves.  Enough  now  of  mixing  in  this  social  life  of  people.  Since 
finally I would enter the grave alone, I said that from now on I would chose solitude 
in  order  to  become  accustomed  to  it.  But regretfully,  things  of  no  consequence  like 
my many and serious friends in Istanbul, and the glittering worldly life there, and in 
particular  the  fame  and  honour  accorded  me,  which  were  far  greater  than  my  due, 
made me temporarily  forget my decision. It  was  as though that  night  in exile was a 
luminous blackness  in  my  life’s  eye,  and  the  glittering  white  daytime  of  Istanbul,  a 
lightless white  in  it.  It  could  not  see ahead,  it  still  slumbered.  Until  two  years  later, 
Ghawth al-Geylani opened my eyes once more with his book Futuh al-Ghayb. 

 

300

O elderly men and women! Know that the weakness and powerless of old age are 
means for attracting divine grace and mercy. The manifestation of mercy on the face 
of the earth demonstrates this truth in the clearest fashion, just as I have observed it in 
myself  on  numerous  occasions.  For  the  weakest  and  most  powerless  of  animals  are 
the  young.  But  then  it  is  they  who  receive  the  sweetest  and  most  beautiful 
manifestation of mercy. The powerlessness of a young bird in the nest at the top of a 
tree attracts the manifestation of mercy to employ its mother like an obedient soldier. 
Its mother flies all around and brings it its food. When with its wings growing strong 
the nestling forgets its impotence, its mother tells it to go and find its own food, and 
no longer listens to it. 

Just as  this  mystery  of  mercy  is  in  force  for  the  young,  so is  it  in  force  for  the 
elderly,  who  resemble  young  in  regard  to  weakness  and  impotence.  I  have  had 
experiences  which  have  led  me  to  form  the  unshakeable  conviction  that  just  as  the 
sustenance of infants is sent to them in wondrous fashion by divine mercy on account 
of their impotence, being made to flow forth  from the springs of breasts; so too the 
sustenance of believing elderly, who acquire innocence, is sent in the form of plenty. 
This  truth  is  also  proved  by  the  Hadith  which says:  “If  it  were  not  for  your  elderly 
folk  with  their  bent  backs,  calamities  would  have  descended  on  you  in  floods.”7  It 
states both that a household’s source of plenty is its elderly inhabitants, and that it is 
the elderly that preserve the household from the visitation of calamities.  

Since  the  weakness  and  impotence  of  old  age  are  thus  the  means  of  attracting 

divine mercy to this extent; and since with its verses: 

Whether one  or both of  them  attain old age  in  your  life,  say  not  to  them a 
word  of  contempt,  nor  repel  them,  but  address  them  in  terms  of  honour.  * 
And  out  of  kindness,  lower  the  wing  of  humility,  and  say:  “My  Sustainer! 
Bestow on them Your mercy even as they cherished me in childhood,”(17:23-
4) 

the All-Wise Qur’an summons children most miraculously in five ways to be kind and 
respectful  towards  their  elderly  parents;  and  since  the  religion  of  Islam  commands 
respect  and  compassion  towards  the  elderly;  and  since  human  nature  also  requires 
respect  and  compassion  towards  the  aged;  we  elderly  people  certainly  receive 
significant, constant mercy and respect from divine grace and human feeling in place 
of  the  fleeting  physical  pleasures  and  appetites  of  youth,  as  well  as  the  spiritual 
pleasures arising from  

                                                 

al-Sunan al-Kubra, iii, 345. 

7 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 163; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, v, 344, No: 7523; al-Bayhaqi, 

 

301

respect and compassion. Since this is the case, we would not exchange this old age of 
ours for a hundred youths. Yes, I can tell you certainly that even if they were to give 
me ten years of the Old Said’s youth, I would not give one year of the New Said’s old 
age. I am content with my old age, and you too should be content with yours! 

TENTH HOPE 

For a year or two in Istanbul after returning from being held as a prisoner-of-war, 
I was overcome by heedlessness. The politics of the day directed my attention away 
from  myself  and  scattered  it  on  the  outside  world.  Then  one  day  I  was  sitting  on  a 
high spot overlooking the valley of the Eyüb Sultan graveyard in Istanbul when I was 
overcome by a state of mind in which, while I was looking down on it, it seemed my 
private world was dying and my spirit was withdrawing. I said: “I wonder if it’s the 
inscriptions on the  gravestones that are  giving me such illusions?”, and I drew back 
my  gaze. I  looked not at the distance, but at the  graveyard. Then the  following was 
imparted  to  my  heart:  “This  graveyard  around  you  holds  Istanbul  a  hundred  times 
over, for Istanbul has been emptied here a hundred times. You cannot escape from the 
command  of  the  All-Wise  and  Powerful  One  who  has  poured  all  the  people  of 
Istanbul into here; you are no exception; you too will depart.” 

I  left  the  graveyard  and  with  those  awesome  thoughts  entered  a  small  cell  in 
Sultan Eyüb Mosque where I had stayed many times before. I thought to myself, I am 
a guest in three respects: I am a guest in this tiny room, I am also a guest in Istanbul, 
and a  guest in this world. A guest has to think of the road. Just as I shall leave this 
room, so one day I  shall  leave  Istanbul, and  yet another day I  shall depart from this 
world. 

While  in  this  state  of  mind,  I,  my  heart,  was  overwhelmed  by  a  most  pitiful, 
grievous sorrow. I was not losing only one or two friends; I would be parted from the 
thousands of people I loved in Istanbul, and I would also part from Istanbul, which I 
also loved much. And just as I would be parted from hundreds of thousands of friends 
in this world, so I would leave the beautiful world, with which I was captivated and I 
loved. While pondering over this, I climbed once more to that spot in the graveyard. I 
had been to the cinema from time to time to take lessons, and just then all the dead of 
Istanbul appeared to me to be walking around, like the  cinema shows  in the present 
the  images  of  the  past.  And  all  the  people  I  could  see  at  that  time  appeared  to  be 
corpses walking around. My imagination told me: some of the dead in the graveyard 
appear to be walking around as though on the cinema-screen, so  you should see the 
people of the present, who are bound  

 

302

to enter the graveyard in the future, as having entered it; they too are corpses, walking 
around. 

Suddenly through the light of the Qur’an and through the guidance of Ghawth al-
A‘zam, Shaykh Geylani, my grievous state was transformed into a joyful one. It was 
like this: 

The  light  proceeding  from  the  Qur’an  gave  me  the  following  thought:  you  had 
one or two officer friends while a prisoner-of-war in exile in Kosturma in the north-
east. You knew that they would in any event go to Istanbul. If one of them had asked 
you: “Do you want to go to Istanbul, or to stay here?” For sure if you had had a jot of 
intelligence, you would joyfully have chosen to go to Istanbul. For out of a thousand 
and one friends, nine hundred and ninety-nine were already in Istanbul. Only one or 
two remained there, and they too would leave. Going to Istanbul for you would not be 
a  sad  departure  and  sorrowful  separation.  Moreover  you  have  come  here  and  were 
you  not  happy  to  do  so?  You  were  delivered  from  the  long,  dark  nights  and  cold, 
stormy winters in that enemy country. You came to Istanbul, a worldly paradise. 

In just the same way, from your childhood to your present age, ninety-nine out of 
a hundred of those you love have migrated to the graveyard, which terrifies you. You 
have one or two friends still in this world, and they too will depart. Your death in this 
world  is  not separation;  it  is union;  it  is  to  be reunited  with  all  those  friends.  I was 
reminded  that  they,  that  is  those  immortal  spirits,  have  left  behind  under  the  earth 
their worn-out dwellings, and some of them are travelling about the stars and some in 
the levels of the Intermediate Realm. 

Yes, the Qur’an and belief proved this truth so certainly that you should believe it 
as  though  seeing  it  if  you  are  not  entirely  lacking  heart  and  spirit,  and  misguidance 
has not suffocated your heart. For most certainly and self-evidently the All-Generous 
Maker  who  adorns  this  world  with  innumerable  sorts  of  gifts  and  bounties,  and 
demonstrates His dominicality munificently and compassionately, and preserves even 
the least significant things like seeds, would not annihilate or send to nothingness or 
waste man as unkindly and purposelessly as it superficially appears, for he is the most 
perfect, comprehensive, important, and beloved among His creatures. Rather, like the 
seeds a farmer scatters on the earth, the Compassionate Creator temporarily casts that 
beloved  creature  of  His  under  the  ground,  which  is  a  door  of  mercy,  in  order  to 
produce shoots in another life.8 

                                                 

8 This truth has been proved as clearly as twice two equals four in other parts of the Risale-i Nur, 

and especially in the Tenth and Twenty-Ninth Words. 

 

303

After receiving this reminder of the Qur’an, the graveyard became more familiar 
to  me  than  Istanbul.  Solitude  and  retirement  became  more  pleasurable  to  me  than 
conversation and company, and I found a place of seclusion for myself in Sar›yer on 
the  Bosphorus.  There,  Ghawth  al-A‘zam  (May  God be pleased  with  him)  became  a 
master, doctor, and guide for me with his Futuh al-Ghayb, while Imam Rabbani (May 
God be pleased with him) became a companion, sympathetic friend, and teacher with 
his  Maktubat  (Letters).  Then  I  was  extremely  happy  I  had  approached  old  age, 
withdrawn from civilization, and slipped free of social life. I thanked God. 

O  respected persons  who  have  entered  upon  old  age  and  who  frequently  recall 
death  through  its  warnings!  In  accordance  with  the  light  of  the  teachings  of  belief 
taught by the Qur’an, we should look favourably on old age, death, and illness, and 
even love them in one respect. Since we have an infinitely precious bounty like belief, 
old  age,  and  illness,  and  death  are  all  agreeable.  If  there  are  things  that  are 
disagreeable, they are sin, vice, innovations, and misguidance. 

ELEVENTH HOPE 

After  my  return  from  captivity,  I  was  living  together  with  my  nephew 
Abdurrahman9 in a villa on the hill at Çamlıca in Istanbul. From the point of view of 
worldly life, my situation could have been thought to be the most fortunate for people 
like us. For I had been saved from being a prisoner-of-war and in the Darü’l-Hikmet 
we were being successful in propagating knowledge in an elevated way suitably to my 
profession,  the  learned  profession.  The  honour  and  esteem  afforded  me  were  far 
greater  than  my  due.  I  was  living  in  Çamlıca,  the  most  beautiful  place  in  Istanbul. 
Everything  was  perfect  for  me.  I  was  together  with  the  late  Abdurrahman,  my 
nephew, who was extremely intelligent and self-sacrificing, and was both my student, 
and  servant,  and  scribe,  and  spiritual  son.  But  then,  knowing  myself  to  be  more 
fortunate than anyone else in the world, I looked in the mirror and I saw grey hairs in 
my hair and beard. 

Suddenly, the spiritual awakening I had experienced in the mosque in Kosturma 
while  in  captivity  recommenced.  I  began  to  study  the  circumstances  and  causes  to 
which I felt geniune attachment and which I supposed were the source of happiness in 
this world. But whichever of them I studied, I saw that it was rotten; it was not worth 
the attachment; it was  

                                                 

9 Abdurrahman was the son of Bediuzzaman’s elder brother, ‘Abdullah. He was born in Nurs in 

1903, and was Bediuzzaman’s spiritual son, student, and assistant. He joined his uncle in Istanbul after 
the First World War, and published a short biography of him at that time. He died in Ankara in 1928, 
where he is buried. (Tr.) 

 

304

deceptive.  Around  that  time,  I  suffered  an  unexpected  and  unimaginable  act  of 
disloyalty and unfaithfulness at the hands of a friend whom I had supposed to be most 
loyal. I felt disgust at  the world. I said to myself: “Have I been altogether deceived? I 
see that many people look with envy at our situation, which in reality should be pitied. 
Are  all  these  people  crazy,  or  is  it  me  that  has  gone  crazy  so  that  I  see  all  these 
worldly people as such?” 

Anyway, as a result of this severe awakening caused me by old age, first of all I 
saw  the  transitoriness  of  all  the  ephemeral  things  to  which  I  was  attached.  Then  I 
looked at myself, and I saw myself to be utterly impotent. So then my spirit declared, 
which desires immortality and was infatuated with ephemeral beings imagining them 
to be immortal: “Since I am a transient being with regard to my body, what good can 
come of these ephemeral things? Since I am powerless, what can I await from these 
powerless things? What I  need is one who is Eternal and Enduring, one who is Pre-
Eternal  and  All-Powerful,  who  will  provide  a  remedy  for  my  ills.”  And  I  began  to 
search. 

Then,  before  everything,  I  had  recourse  to  the  learning  I  had  studied  of  old,  I 
began  to  search  for  a  consolation,  a  hope.  But  unfortunately,  up  to  that  time  I  had 
filled  my  mind  with  the  sciences  of  philosophy  as  well  as  the  Islamic  sciences,  and 
quite in error had imagined those philosophical sciences to be the source of progress 
and means of  illumination.  However, those philosophical matters  had greatly dirtied 
my  spirit  and  been  an  obstacle  to  my  spiritual  development.  Suddenly,  through 
Almighty God’s mercy and munificence, the sacred wisdom of the All-Wise Qur’an 
came to my assistance. As  is explained in many  parts of the Risale-i Nur, it washed 
away and cleansed the dirt of those philosophical matters. 

For  instance,  the  spiritual  darknesses  arising  from  science  and  philosophy 
plunged my spirit into the universe. Whichever way I looked seeking a light, I could 
find not a gleam  in those matters,  I could not breathe. And so it continued until the 
instruction in divine unity given by the phrase from the All-Wise Qur’an “There is no 
god but He” dispersed all those layers of darkness with its brilliant light, and I could 
breathe with ease. But relying on what they had learnt from the people of misguidance 
and philosophers, my soul and Satan attacked my reason and my heart. All thanks be 
to  God,  the  ensuing  debate  with  my  soul  resulted  in  the  victory of  my  heart.  Those 
exchanges have been described in part in many parts of the Risale-i Nur. So deeming 
them to be sufficient, here I shall explain only one proof out of thousands in order to 
show one thousandth part of that victory of the heart. In this way it may also cleanse 
the spirits of certain elderly people which  

 

305

have been dirtied in their youth, and their hearts sickened and souls spoilt, by matters 
which  though  called  Western  philosophy  or  the  sciences  of  civilization,  are  in  part 
misguidance and in part trivia. And through divine unity, they may be saved from evil 
of Satan and the soul. It is as follows: 

My soul said in the name of science and philosophy: “According to the nature of 
things,  the  beings  in  the  universe  intervene  in  other  beings.  Everything  looks  to  a 
cause. The fruit has to be sought from the tree and seed from the soil. So what does it 
mean to seek the tiniest and least insignificant thing from God and to beseech Him for 
it?” 

Through the light of the Qur’an, the meaning of divine unity then unfolded in the 
following way: like the greatest thing, the tiniest and most particular proceeds directly 
from the power of the Creator of the whole universe and emerges from His treasury. It 
cannot occur in any other way. As for causes, they are merely a veil. For in regard to 
art  and  creation,  sometimes  the  creatures  we  suppose  to  be  the  smallest  and  least 
important are greater than the largest creatures. Even if a fly is not of greater art than 
a chicken, it is not of lesser art. In which case, no difference should be made between 
great and small. Either all should be divided between material causes, or all should be 
attributed at once to a single Being. And just as the former is impossible, the latter is 
necessary and imperative.   

For if beings are attributed to a single Being, that is to a Pre-Eternal All-Powerful 
One, since His knowledge, the existence of which is certain by reason of the order and 
wisdom in all beings, encompasses everything; and since the measure of all things is 
determined in His knowledge; and since observedly beings which are infinitely full of 
art  continuously  come  into  existence  from  nothing  with  infinite  ease;  and  since  in 
accordance  with  innumerable  powerful  evidences  that  All-Knowing  All-Powerful 
One is able to create anything whatever through the command of “‘Be!’ and it is” as 
simply as striking a match, and as is explained in many parts of the Risale-i Nur and 
proved particularly in the Twentieth Letter and at the end of the Twenty-Third Flash, 
He  possesses  unlimited  power  –  since  this  is  the  case,  the  extraordinary  ease  and 
facility  which  we  observe  arises  from  that  all-encompassing  knowledge  and  vast 
power. 

For example, if a special solution is applied to a book written in invisible ink, that 
huge book suddenly demonstrates  its  existence  visibly  and makes itself read. In  just 
the same way, the particular form and appointed measure of everything is determined 
in the all-encompassing knowledge of the Pre-Eternal All-Powerful One. Through the 
command  of  “‘Be!’  and  it  is”  and  with  that  limitless  power  of  His  and  penetrating 
will,  like  spreading  the  solution  on  the  writing,  the  Absolutely  All-Powerful  One 
applies a  

 

306

manifestation  of  His  power  to  the  being  which  exists  as  knowledge  and  with  utter 
ease  and  facility  gives  it  external  existence;  He  displays  and  makes  read  the 
embroideries of His wisdom. 

If all things  are not all together attributed to that Pre-Eternal All-Powerful One, 
the  One  Knowing  of  All  Things,  then  as  well  as  having  to  gather  together  in  a 
particular measure from most of the varieties of beings in the world the body of the 
tiniest  thing  like  a  fly,  the  particles  which  work  in  that  tiny  fly’s  body  will  have  to 
know the mysteries of the fly’s creation and its perfect art in all its minutest details. 
For as all the intelligent agree, natural causes and physical causes cannot create out of 
nothing.  In  which  case,  if  they  do  create,  they  will  gather  the  being  together.  And 
since  they  will  gather  it  together  –  whatever  animate  being  it  is,  there  are  within  it 
samples  of  most  of  the  elements  and  most  of  the  varieties  of  beings,  for  living 
creatures are quite simply like a seed or essence of the universe – it will of course be 
necessary for them to gather together a seed from the whole tree and an animate being 
from the whole face of the earth sifting them through a fine sieve and measuring them 
with  the  most  sensitive  balance.  And  since  natural  causes  are  ignorant  and  lifeless, 
and have no knowledge with which to determine a plan, index, model, or programme 
according to which they can smelt and pour the particles which enter the immaterial 
mould of the being in question, so they do not disperse and spoil its order, it is clear 
how far it is from possibility and reason to suppose that, without mould or measure, 
they can make the particles of the elements which flow like floods remain one on the 
other in the  form of an orderly mass without dispersing,  for everything has  a single 
form and measure amid possibilities without calculation or count. For sure, everyone 
who does not suffer from blindness in his heart will see it. Yes, in consequence of this 
truth, according to the meaning of the verse, 

Those on whom you call besides God cannot create [even] a fly, if they all 
met together for the purpose,(22:73)10 

if all material causes were to gather together and if they possessed will, they could not 
gather  together  the  being  of  a  single  fly  and  its  systems  and  organs  with  their 
particular balance. And even if they could gather them together, they could not make 
them remain in the specified measure of the being. And even if they could make them 
remain thus, they  could not make those minute particles, which are constantly being 
renewed  and  coming  into  existence  and  working,  work  regularly  and  in  order.  In 
which case,  

                                                 

10 That is, “Should all the things you call upon and worship other than God were to gather 

together, they could not create so much as a fly.” 

 

307

self-evidently,  causes  cannot  claim  ownership  of  things.  That  is  to  say,  their  True 
Owner is someone else. 

Indeed, their True Owner is such that, according to the verse, 

Your creation and your resurrection is as a single soul,(32:28) 

He raises to life all the living beings on the face of the earth as easily as He raises to 
life a single fly. He creates the spring as easily as He creates a single flower. For He 
has  no  need  to  gather  things  together.  Since  He  is  the  owner  of  the  command  of 
“‘Be!’  and  it  is;”  and  since  every  spring  He  creates  from  nothing  the  innumerable 
attributes,  states,  and  forms  of  the  innumerable  beings  of  spring  together  with  the 
elements  of  their  physical  beings;  and  since  He  determines  the  plan,  model,  index, 
and programme of everything in His knowledge; and since all minute particles are in 
motion  within  the  sphere  of  His  knowledge  and  power;  He  therefore  creates 
everything with infinite ease as though striking a match. And nothing at all confuses 
its  motion  so  much  as  an  iota.  And  minute  particles  are  like  a  regular,  disciplined 
army in the same way that the planets are an obedient army. 

Since  they  are  in  motion  relying  on  that  pre-eternal  power  and  function  in 
accordance with the principles of that pre-eternal knowledge, those works come into 
existence  in  accordance  with  the  power.  They  therefore  cannot  be  deemed 
insignificant by considering their unimportant individualities. For through the strength 
of being connected to that power, a fly can kill off Nimrod, and an ant can destroy the 
Pharaoh’s palace, and the minute seed of the pine bears on its shoulder the burden of 
the pine-tree as tall as a mountain. We have proved this truth in  numerous places  in 
the Risale-i Nur: just as through his enlistment in the army and being connected to the 
king, an ordinary soldier can take another king prisoner, exceeding his own capacity a 
hundred thousand  times;  so  too, by  being  connected  to pre-eternal  power,  all  things 
can  manifest  miracles  of  art  exceeding  the  capacity  of  natural  causes  hundreds  of 
thousands of times. 

In Short: The fact that all things come into existence with both infinite art and 
infinite  ease  shows  that  they  are  the  works  of  a  Pre-Eternal  All-Powerful  One 
possessing  all-encompassing  knowledge.  Otherwise, let  alone  coming  into  existence 
with  a  hundred  thousand  difficulties,  leaving  the  bounds  of  possibility  and  entering 
those of impossibility, nothing could even come into existence, indeed, their coming 
into existence would be impossible and precluded. 

Thus,  through  this  most  subtle,  powerful,  profound,  and  clear  proof,  my  soul, 
which  had  been  a  temporary  student  of  Satan  and  the  spokesman  for  the  people  of 
misguidance  and  the  philosophers,  was  silenced, and,  all  praise  be  to  God,  came  to 
believe completely. It said: 

 

308

Yes, what I need is a Creator and Sustainer who possesses the power to know the 
least thoughts of my heart and my most secret wishes; and as He will answer the most 
hidden needs of my spirit, so he will transform the mighty earth into the hereafter in 
order to give me eternal happiness, and remove this world and put the hereafter in its 
place; and create the heavens as He creates a fly; and as He fastens the sun as an eye 
in the face of the sky, so he can situate a particle in the pupil of my eye. For one who 
cannot create a fly cannot intervene in the thoughts of my  heart and cannot hear the 
pleas  of  my  spirit.  One  who  cannot  create  the  heavens,  cannot  give  me  eternal 
happiness. In which case, my Sustainer is He who both purifies my heart’s thoughts, 
and  like  He  fills  and  empties  the  skies  with  clouds  in  an  hour,  so  he  will  transform 
this world into the hereafter, make Paradise, and open its doors to me, bidding me to 
enter.  

My elderly brothers who as a result of misfortune, like my soul, have spent part 
of  their  lives  on  lightless  Western  materialist  philosophy  and  science!  Understand 
from the sacred decree of “There is no god but He” perpetually uttered by the tongue 
of the Qur’an, just how powerful, true, unshakeable, undamageable, unchanging, and 
sacred a pillar of belief it is, and how it disperses all spiritual darkness and cures all 
spiritual wounds! 

I  included  this  long  story  among  the  doors  of  hope  of  my  old  age  as  though 
involuntarily. I did not want to include it, indeed, I held back from doing so because I 
thought  it  would  be  tedious.  But  I  have  to  say  that  I  felt  compelled  to  write  it. 
Anyway, to return to the main topic: 

In  consequence  of  grey  hairs  appearing  in  my  hair  and  beard  and  of  a  loyal 
friend’s unfaithfulness, I felt a disgust at the pleasures of Istanbul’s worldly life which 
was so glittering and superficially agreeable and gilded. My soul searched for spiritual 
pleasures  in  place  of  the  pleasures  with  which  it  was  obsessed.  It  wanted  a  light,  a 
solace,  in  this  old  age  which  in  the  view  of  the  heedless  is  cold,  burdensome,  and 
disagreeable. And all praise be to God and a hundred thousand thanks, just as I found 
true, lasting, and sweet pleasures of belief in “There is no god but He” and in the light 
of divine unity in place of all those false, disagreeable, fleeting worldly pleasures, so 
through the  light of divine unity,  I saw old age which  in the  view of the  heedless  is 
cold and burdensome to be most light, and warm, and luminous. 

O  you  elderly  men  and  women!  Since  you  have  belief  and  since  you  pray  and 
offer supplications which illuminate and increase belief, you can regard your old age 
as eternal youth. For through it you can gain eternal youth. The old age which in truth 
is  cold,  burdensome,  ugly,  dark,  and  full  of  pain  is  the  old  age  of  the  people  of 
misguidance, indeed, their youth as  

 

309

well.  It  is  they  who  should  weep  with  sighs  and  regrets.  While  you,  respected 
believing elderly people, should joyfully offer thanks  saying: “All praise and thanks 
be to God for every situation!” 

TWELFTH HOPE 

One time, I was being held in the district of Barla in the province of Isparta in a 
distressing captivity called exile, in a truly wretched state suffering both illness, and 
old age, and absence from home, and in a village alone with no one, barred from all 
company and communication. Then, in His perfect mercy, Almighty God bestowed a 
light on me concerning the subtle points and mysteries of the All-Wise Qur’an which 
was  a source of  consolation  for me.  With  it,  I tried  to  forget  my pitiful,  sad  state.  I 
was able to forget my  native  land, my  friends and relations, but alas, there was one 
person I could not forget and that was Abdurrahman, who was both my nephew, and 
my spiritual son, and my most devoted student, and my  bravest friend. He had parted 
from me six or seven years previously. Neither he knew where I was so that he could 
hasten to help and console me, nor did I know his situation so that I could correspond 
with  him and we could confide in each other. Now in my old age, I was  in  need of 
someone loyal and self-sacrificing like him. 

Then out of the blue someone gave me a letter. I opened it and saw it was from 
Abdurrahman,  written  in  a  way  which  showed  his  true  self.  A part of  it that  clearly 
shows three instances of wonder-working has been included among the pieces of the 
Twenty-Seventh  Letter.  It  made  me  weep,  and  it  still  makes  me  weep.  The  late 
Abdurrahman wrote in the letter seriously and sincerely that he was disgusted with the 
pleasures  of  the  world  and  that  his  greatest  desire  was  to  reach  me  and  look  to  my 
needs in my old age just as I had looked to his when he was young. He also wanted to 
help me with his capable pen in spreading the mysteries of the Qur’an, my true duty 
in this world. He even wrote in his letter: “Send me twenty or thirty treatises and I’ll 
write out twenty or thirty copies of each and get others to write them.” 

His  letter  made  me  feel  very  hopeful  in  respect  of the  world.  With  the  thought 
that  I  had found  a bold  student  who  was  so  intelligent  as  to  be  a  genius  and  would 
assist  me  more  loyally  and  with  greater  attachment  than  a  true  son,  I  forgot  my 
torturous captivity, loneliness, exile, and old age. 

He  had  obtained  a  copy of  the  Tenth  Word  about  belief  in  the  hereafter  before 
writing  the  letter.  It  was  as  if  it  had  been  a  remedy  for  him  curing  all  the  spiritual 
wounds he  had received during those six or seven  years. He then wrote the  letter to 
me as if he was awaiting his death with a truly  

 

310

strong and shining belief. Then one or two months later while thinking of once again 
passing a happy worldly life together with Abdurrahman, alas, I received news of his 
death. I was so shaken that  five  years  later I am  still under its effect. It afflicted me 
with  a  grief,  sorrow,  and  sense  of  separation  far  exceeding  the  torturous  captivity, 
aloneness, exile, old age, and illness I was then  suffering.  Half of my private world 
had died with the death of my mother, and now with Abdurrahman’s death, the other 
half  died.  My  ties  with  the  world  were  now  completely  cut.  For  if  he  had lived,  he 
could have been both a powerful help in my duties which looked to the hereafter, and 
a  worthy  successor  to  fill  my  place  completely after  me, and  a  most  self-sacrificing 
friend and consolation. He would have been my cleverest student and companion, and 
a most trustworthy protector and owner of the Risale-i Nur. 

Yes, in regard to humanity, such losses are extremely distressing and painful for 
people like me. It’s true outwardly  I was trying to endure it, but a fierce storm was 
raging in my spirit. If from time to time solace proceeding from the Qur’an’s light had 
not consoled me, I would not have been able to endure it. At the time I used to wander 
alone in the mountains and valleys of Barla. Sitting in lonely places amid my sorrows, 
pictures  of  the  happy  life  I  had  spent  in  former  times  with  my  loyal  students  like 
Abdurrahman  passed  through  my  imagination  like  the  cinema;  since  due  to  old  age 
and  exile  I  was  swiftly  affected,  they  broke  my  resistance.  Suddenly  the  sacred 
meaning of the verse, 

Everything  shall perish  save  His  countenance;  His  is  the  command, and to 
Him shall you return(28:88) 

was unfolded to me. It caused me to declare: “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal! 
O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!”, and truly consoled me. 

Then,  inspired  by  this  verse’s  meaning  as  is  described  in  the  treatise,  The 
Highway of the Practices of the Prophet (UWBP), I saw myself while in that  lonely 
valley and sad state, at the head of three vast corpses: 

One  was the  sight  of  myself  as  a  gravestone  on  the  grave  of  the  fifty-five dead 

Said’s of my fifty-five years who had been buried in the course of my life. 

The second corpse was the vast corpse of all my fellow-men who had died since 
the time of Adam (UWP) and had been buried in the grave of the past. I saw myself as 
a miniscule ant-like living creature at the head of that corpse, wandering over the face 
of this century, which was like its gravestone. 

The third corpse was the greater world which, like human beings and  

 

311

the travelling worlds which every year die, would also – in accordance with the above 
verse – die; this was embodied before my imagination. 

Then the verse,  

But if they turn away, say: “God suffices me, there is no god but He; in Him 
the  Throne  [of  Glory] 
do  I  place  my  trust—He  the  Sustainer  of 
Supreme!”(9:129) 

illuminated with its true solace and inextinguishable light that awesome vision arising 
from  my  grief  at  Abdurrahman’s  death;  it  came  to  my  assistance  with  its  allusive 
meaning, which states: since Almighty God exists, He takes the place of everything. 
Since He is Eternal, He is surely sufficient. A single manifestation of His grace takes 
the place of the whole world. One manifestation of His light infuses with life the three 
vast    corpses  mentioned  above,  showing  that  they  are  not  corpses  but  having 
completed  their  duties,  have  departed  for  other  worlds.  This  mystery  has  been 
explained in the Third Flash, so that sufficing with the above, here I only say that the 
two repetitions of the phrase: “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!  O Eternal One, 
You  alone  are  Eternal!”,  which  illustrates  the  meaning  of  “Everything  shall  perish 
save  His  countenance  [to  the  end  of  the  verse],”(28:88)  saved  me  from  that 
distressing, sad state. It was like this: 

The first time I uttered “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!”, it began to cure 
me like a surgical operation on the endless spiritual wounds arising from the passing 
of the world and of the friends in this world to whom I was attached, and from the ties 
binding me being broken. 

The second time, the phrase “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!” was both a 
salve  and  an  antidote  for  all  those  innumerable  wounds.  That  is  to  say:  “You  are 
eternal. If the rest depart, let them; You are enough for me. Since You abide for ever, 
a  single  manifestation  of  Your  mercy  is  sufficient  in  place  of  all  transient  things. 
Since You exist, everything exists  for the person who knows of the connection with 
Your  existence  established  through  belief  and  Islam  acts  in  accordance  with  that 
relation.  Transience  and  decline, death  and  non-existence  are  a  veil,  a  renewal;  like 
travelling through different domains.” Thinking this, my painful, sad, grievous, dark, 
awesome,  separation-stained  state  of  mind  was  transformed  into  a  happy,  joyful, 
pleasurable,  luminous,  lovable,  familiar  state.  My  tongue  and  heart,  indeed  all  the 
particles of my being through the tongue of disposition, exclaimed: “All praise be to 
God!” 

One  thousandth  of  that  manifestation  of  mercy  is  this:  I  returned  to  Barla  from 
that  sorrowful  valley  and  melancholy  state  of  mind,  where  I saw  that  a  young  man 
called Kuleönlü Mustafa had come to ask me some  

 

312

questions about the five daily prayers and ablutions. Although I did not accept visitors 
at that hour, my spirit perceived as though with foresight his sincerity of spirit and the 
future  valuable  services  he would perform  for the  Risale-i Nur,11  and I  did not  turn 
him away, I accepted him.12 It later became clear that Almighty God sent Mustafa to 
me as a sample in place of Abdurrahman, who as a worthy successor would carry out 
completely the duty of a true heir in the work of the Risale-i Nur, as though saying: “I 
took one Abdurrahman from you, but I shall give you thirty like the Mustafa you see 
in  return,  who  will  be  both  students,  and  nephews,  and  spiritual  sons,  and  brothers, 
and self-sacrificing comrades in this duty for religion.” 

Yes, praise be to God, He  gave me thirty Abdurrahman’s. So I told myself: “O 
weeping  heart! Since  you have seen this  sample  and through  him  He  has  healed the 
most  serious  of  your  spiritual  wounds,  be  assured  that  He  will  heal  all  the  rest  of 
them.” 

My elderly brothers and sisters who like me have lost at the time of their old age 
a  child  or  relative  they  love  dearly,  and  who  have  to  bear  the  searing  sorrows  of 
separation  together  with  the  burdens  of  old  age!  You  have  understood  from  my 
situation that although it was much harsher than yours, it was cured and healed by a 
verse of the Qur’an. This being so, there are remedies in that sacred pharmacy to heal 
all  your difficulties.  If  you have recourse to it through belief and make use of those 
remedies  

                                                 

11 With his fine pen, Mustafa’s younger brother, Küçük Ali, wrote out more than seven hundred 
copies of parts of the Risale-i Nur and himself became an Abdurrahman. He also trained many other 
Abdurrahman’s. 

12 He truly showed that he was not only worthy of being accepted, but also worthy of the future.* 
* An event confirming that Ustad’s prediction that Mustafa, the first student of the Risale-i Nur, 

was worthy of the future: 

The day preceding the eve of ‘Eid al-Adha, the Feast of Sacrifices, Ustad intended to go out to 
take some air. When he sent me to fetch the horse, I said to him: “Don’t you go down. I’ll lock the door 
from the back, and go out from the wood-store.” Ustad said: “No. You go out of the door.” And he 
went down. After I had gone out, he bolted the door after me. I went out and he returned upstairs. He 
then slept. A while later Kuleönlü Mustafa arrived together with Haji Osman. Ustad was not accepting 
anyone, and he was not going to accept anyone. He would never have taken in two people together, 
especially at that hour, and would have turned them away. Nevertheless, when our brother Kuleönlü 
Mustafa, whom we are talking about here, came with Haji Osman, it was as though the door said to 
him through the tongue of disposition: “Ustad will not accept you, but I’ll open for you.” And although 
it was bolted from the inside, the door opened of its own accord for Mustafa. That is to say, just as the 
future verified what Ustad had said about him: “Mustafa is worthy of the future,” so did the door testify 
to it. 

                                                                                              Signed:  Hüsrev             
Yes, what Hüsrev has written is correct and I confirm it. The door both greeted this blessed 

Mustafa in my place, and accepted him.                                           Said Nursi 

 

 

313

through  worship,  the  heavy  burdens  of  your  old  age  and  your  sorrows  will  be 
alleviated considerably. 

The  reason  for  writing  this  long  piece  was  to  seek  more  prayers  for 
Abdurrahman, not to weary you. Also, my purpose in showing my worst wound in an 
extremely grievous and unpleasant way which may upset you unduly and put you off, 
is to demonstrate what a wondrous remedy and brilliant light is the sacred antidote of 
the All-Wise Qur’an. 
THIRTEENTH HOPE13 

In this  Hope I shall describe an  important scene from my  life;  it  is bound to be 

somewhat lengthy, so I hope you will not become bored or be offended. 

After  being  saved  from  captivity  in  Russia  during  the  Great  War,  my  serving 
religion in the Darü’l-Hikmet kept me in Istanbul for two or three years. Then through 
the guidance of the All-Wise Qur’an and spiritual influence of Ghawth al-A’zam and 
the  awakening  of  old  age,  I  felt  a  weariness  at  the  civilized  life  of  Istanbul  and  a 
disgust at its  glittering social life. A feeling of longing for my  native land drove me 
there, I went to Van with the thought that since I am bound to die, I’ll die in my own 
country. 

First of all, I went to visit my medrese in  Van, the Horhor. The Armenians  had 
razed  it  during  the  Russian  occupation,  like  the  rest  of  the  buildings.  It  was  right 
under  and  adjacent  to  Van’s  famous  citadel,  which  is  a  great  monolith  like  a 
mountain. My true friends, brothers, and close students of the medrese were embodied 
before  my  eyes.  Some  of  those  devoted  friends  had  become  actual  martyrs,  while 
others had died due to that calamity and had in effect become martyrs. 

I  could  not  restrain  myself  from  weeping.  I  climbed  to  the  top  of  the  citadel 
which overlooking the medrese, towers above it to the height of two minarets, and I 
sat  down.  I  went  back  in  my  imagination  seven  or  eight  years.  Having  a  powerful 
imagination, I wandered all around that time in my mind. There was no one around to 
distract me and draw me back. For I was alone. As my view of those seven or eight 
years expanded, I saw enough to fill a century. I saw that the town at the foot of the 
citadel had been completely burnt and destroyed. It was as though two hundred years 
had  passed  from  when  I  had  seen  it  previously  to  them,  it  seemed  so  infinitely  sad. 
Most of the houses’ inhabitants had been my friends and  

                                                 

13 It is a subtle ‘coincidence’ that the incident of the medrese* which this Thirteenth Hope 

describes occurred thirteen years ago. (1921 – Tr.) 

* Medrese: school where religious sciences were taught. See also, note 21, page 325. (Tr.) 

 

314

acquaintances. The majority of them had died in the migrations, may God have mercy 
on them, or had gone to a wretched exile. Only the Armenian quarter remained, all the 
Muslim houses of Van had been levelled. My heart was lacerated. I was so affected, if 
I  had  had  a  thousand  eyes  they  would  have  all  wept  together.  I  had  returned  to  my 
homeland from exile; I had supposed that I had been saved from exile. But alas! the 
most lamentable exile I experienced was in my homeland. I saw that hundreds of my 
students  and  friends  to  whom  I  had  been  closely  attached,  like  Abdurrahman  in  the 
Twelfth Hope, had entered the grave and that their places were all ruins.  

There were some lines that  had long been in my  mind but I had not understood 
their true meaning. Now before that sad scene I gained a full understanding of them. 
The  lines  were  these:  “If  there  was  no  separation  from  friends,  death  could  find  no 
way to our spirits to seize them.”14 That is to say, what kills man most is separation 
from those he loves. Yes, nothing had caused me as much suffering and sorrow as that 
situation.  If  assistance  had not come from the Qur’an and from belief, my  grief and 
sorrow and suffering would have made my spirit fly away. 

Since early times in their verses, poets have lamented the destruction with time of 
the places they have been together with their beloveds. I had seen this most painfully 
with my own eyes. With the sorrow of someone passing by the dwellings of beloved 
friends after two hundred years, my heart and spirit joined my eyes in weeping. Then 
one by one the happy scenes of the life I had passed for nearly twenty years in study 
with my valuable students, when the places which were now in ruins were flourishing 
and happy, sprang to life before me like pictures at the  cinema, then died away  and 
vanished. This continued before the eye of my imagination for some time. 

Then  I  felt  astonished  at  the  state  of  the  worldly,  how  is  it  that  they  deceive 
themselves?  For  the  situation  there  showed  clearly  that  this  world  is  transitory  and 
that  human  beings  are  guests  within  it.  I  saw  with  my  own  eyes  how  true  are  the 
constantly repeated words of the people of reality: “The world is cruel, treacherous, 
bad; don’t be deceived by it!” I also saw that just as man is connected with his own 
body  and  household,  so  is  he  connected  with  his  town,  his  country,  and  with  the 
world. For while weeping with my two eyes at the pitifulness of old age in respect of 
my body, I wanted to weep with ten eyes not only at my medrese’s old age, but at its 
death.  And  I  felt  the  need  to  weep  with  a  hundred  eyes  at  the  half-death  of  my 
beautiful homeland. 

                                                 

14 These lines are in Arabic in the original text, and are by Mutanabi. (Tr.) 

 

315

It states in a Hadith that every morning an angel calls out: “You are born to die, 
and  construct  buildings  that  they  may  be  destroyed.”15  I  was  hearing  this  truth  not 
with my ears, but with my eyes.  

Ten  years  later  I  still  weep  when  I  think  of  that  situation,  as  it  made  me  weep 
then. Yes, the ruins of the houses at the foot of the ancient citadel, thousands of years 
old, and the town ageing eight hundred years in eight years, and the death of my once-
flourishing  medrese  which  had been  the  gathering-place  of  friends,  all  indicated the 
vastness of the immaterial corpse of all the medreses  in the Ottoman Empire, which 
now had died; the great monolith of Van’s citadel had become a gravestone to all of 
them.  It  was  as  though  my  students  who  had been  together  with  me  in  the  medrese 
eight  years  previously  were  weeping  in  their  graves  together  with  me.  Indeed,  the 
ruined walls of the town and its scattered stones were weeping with me. I saw them to 
be weeping. 

Then I understood that I could not endure this exile in my native land. I thought 
that  I  would  either  have  to  join  them  in  the  grave,  or  withdraw  into  a  cave  in  the 
mountains  and  await  my  death  there.  I  told  myself:  “These  unendurable,  searing 
separations which destroy patience and resistance surely make death preferable to life. 
The pains of such a life are unbearable.” 

I  then  cast  a  glance  over  the  six  aspects  and  saw  that  they  were  all  black.  The 
heedlessness  resulting  from  my  intense  grief  showed  me  the  world  as  terrifying, 
empty,  desolate,  and  about  to  collapse  over  my  head.  My  spirit  sought  a  point  of 
support in the face of innumerable hostile calamities. Its endless desires which stretch 
to eternity were seeking out something to satisfy them. While awaiting consolation in 
the face of the sorrow arising from those endless separations and deaths, that endless 
devastation, suddenly the truth was manifested of the All-Wise Qur’an’s verses: 

Whatever is in the heavens and on earth—let it declare the praises and glory 
of God; for He is Exalted in Might, the Wise. * To Him belongs the dominion 
of the heavens and the earth: it is He Who gives life and death; and He has 
power over all things.(57:1-2) 

It saved me from that pitiful, terrible, sad, separation-stained imagining, and opened 
my  eyes.  I  saw  that  the  fruits  at  the  tops  of  the  fruit-trees  were  looking  at  me  as 
though smiling. “Note us as well,” they were saying. “Do not only look at the ruins.” 
The verses’ truth brought the following thought to mind: 

                                                 

Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, i, 94. 

15 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 128, No: 2041; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, v, 483, No: 8053; al-

 

316

“Why does an artificial letter written in the form of a town by the hand of man, 
who  is  a  guest on  the  page  of  Van’s  plain,  being  wiped out by  a  calamitous  torrent 
called  the  Russian  invasion  sadden  you  to  this  extent?  Consider  the  Pre-Eternal 
Inscriber,  everything’s  True  Owner  and  Sustainer,  for  His  missives  on  this  page 
continue to be written in glittering fashion, in the way you used to see. Your weeping 
over  those  desolate  ruins  arises  from  the  error  of  forgetting  their  True  Owner,  not 
thinking that men are guests and imagining them to be owner.” 

A door to reality opened up from my error, from that searing sight, and my soul 
was prepared to accept the reality completely. Like iron is plunged in the fire so that it 
softens  and  may  be  profited  from,  that  grievous  sight  and  terrible  state  were  fire 
which  softened  my  soul.  Through  the  reality  of  the  above  verses,  the  Qur’an  of 
Miraculous Exposition showed my soul the effulgence of the truths of belief, causing 
it to accept it. 

Yes, all thanks be to God, as is proved conclusively in such parts of the Risale-i 
Nur as the Twentieth Letter, through the effulgence of belief in God, the truth of the 
verses  becomes  a  source  of  strength  for  the  spirit  and  heart  which  unfolds 
proportionately  to  the  firmness  of  each  person’s  belief.  This  was  so  powerful  it 
afforded me the  strength to confront calamities even  a  hundred times more dreadful 
than  the  situation  I  beheld.  It  uttered  this  reminder:  “Everything  is  subjected  to  the 
command of this country’s True Owner, your Creator. He holds the reins of all things. 
Your relation with Him should be sufficient.” 

On recognizing my Creator and relying on Him, all the things that had  appeared 
hostile gave up their enmity, and the grievous things that had made me weep started 
to make me  happy. As we  have demonstrated with certain proofs in many places  in 
the  Risale-i  Nur,  through  the  light  proceeding  from  belief  in  the  hereafter,  that 
recognition  and  reliance  afforded  such  assistance  in  the  face  of  my  endless  desires 
that  it  was  sufficient  not  only  for  my  attachment  to  and  desire  for  insignificant, 
temporary, brief worldly friendships, but for my innumerable far-reaching desires in 
the world of permanence, for everlasting  happiness through all eternity. For through 
one  manifestation  of  His  mercy,  the  All-Merciful  and  Compassionate  One  every 
spring  lays  on  the  table  of  that  season  incalculable  numbers  of  delightful,  artful 
bounties in order to please His guests of one or two hours. Then after providing them 
with  these,  which  are  a  sort  of  snack  or  appetizer,  He  prepares  for  His  servants 
innumerable  varieties  of  bounties,  and  for  an  unending  time  fills  eight  permanent 
Paradises  with  them  from  among  His  everlasting  dwelling-places.  The  person  who 
relies  on  the  mercy  of  such  an All-Merciful  and  Compassionate  One  through  belief 
and  

 

317

knows  his relation surely finds such  a source of assistance that even  its  least degree 
provides for innumerable hopes reaching to eternity, and causes them to continue. 

Furthermore,  through  the  reality  of  the  verses,  the  light  proceeding  from  the 
effulgence  of  belief  was  manifested  in  such  brilliant  fashion  that  it  lit  up  those  six 
dark aspects like daytime. It illuminated the grief I felt for my students and friends in 
my medrese and in the town with this reminder: “The world your friends have gone to 
is not dark. They have merely gone somewhere else;  you will meet again.” It put an 
end to my tears entirely, and made me understand that I would find others resembling 
them in this world who would take their place. 

Yes, all praise be to God, He both raised to life the dead Van medrese with the 
medrese of Isparta, and He in meaning raised my friends there to life with the more 
numerous and valuable students and friends here. It also made known that the world is 
not empty and meaningless and that my thinking of it as a ravaged country had been 
wrong: as required by His wisdom, the True Owner changes the artificial scenes made 
by man and renews His missives. The more the fruits of some trees are plucked, the 
more  others  grow  in  their  places;  so  too  death  and  separation  among  mankind 
constitute renewal and change. In respect of belief, they  are a renewal that produces 
not the grievous sorrow arising from the lack of friends, but the sweet sorrow born of 
parting in the hope of meeting again in another, better place. 

The  verses  also  illuminated  the  face  of  the  beings  in  the  universe  which  had 
appeared dark in the former ghastly situation. I wanted to offer thanks for this, and the 
following Arabic lines occurred to me, which described that reality exactly. I said: 

“All praise be to God for the light of belief, which dispels the  illusion of beings 
as hostile strangers, moribund and savage, as weeping orphans, and shows them to be 
loving  brothers,  living  and  familiar,  joyfully  employed  in  mentioning  God’s  names 
and glorifying Him.” 

That is to say, due to the heedlessness resulting from my grievous state of mind, 
some  of  the  beings  in  the  universe  appeared  to  my  neglectful  soul  as  hostile  and 
strange,16  others  as  awesome  corpses,  and  yet  others  as  orphans  weeping  in  their 
loneliness. In the light of belief I saw that they were all friends and brothers. As for 
the awesome corpses, some were living and friendly while others  had been released 
from their duties. Seeing through the light of belief the wailing of the orphans to be 
the murmuring  

                                                 

16 Like earthquake, storm, tempest, plague, and fire. 

 

318

of remembrance  and glorification of God, I offered endless praise and thanks to the 
Glorious  Creator,  for  He  had  given  me  belief,  the  source  of  these  innumerable 
bounties.  And  seeing  that  it  is  incumbent  on  me  to  think  of  all  the  beings  in  my 
personal  world,  which  is  as  vast  as  the  world,  as  being  engaged  in  the  praise  and 
glorification of God, and through  intention to make use of them,  it means that  I say 
“All praise and thanks to God for the light of belief” together with all those beings, 
who utter it singly and as a whole through the tongue of disposition. 

 Moreover,  the  pleasures  of  life,  which  had  been  reduced  to  nothing  by  my 
heedless  and dreadful state of mind, and my  hopes, which  had withered up entirely, 
and  my  personal  enjoyment  and  bounties,  which  had  been  constricted  within  the 
narrowest bounds, indeed, destroyed, suddenly so expanded through the light of belief 
that narrow sphere around my heart that it contained the whole universe – as has been 
proved clearly in other  parts of the Risale-i Nur – and in place of the bounties which 
had withered up in the garden of the Horhor Medrese and lost their taste, it made the 
realms of this world and the hereafter each a merciful table of bounties. It showed that 
not  only  the  ten  or  so  human  members  like  the  eyes,  ears,  and  heart,  but  also  the 
hundred  members  were  an  extremely  long  arm  which  believers  might  extend  each 
according  to  his  degree,  to  those  two  tables  of  the  Most  Merciful,  to  gather  in  the 
bounties from all sides. At that time, I uttered the following words both to express this 
elevated truth, and as thanks for those endless bounties: 

“I offer praise and thanks to my Creator for the light and bounty of belief to my 
very utmost, with all the particles of my being, for it shows me that this world and the 
hereafter  are  overflowing  with  bounties  and  mercy,  and  allows  me  and  all  true 
believers  to  benefit  from  those  two  vast  tables  with  the  hands  of  all  their  senses, 
which develop and unfold through the light of belief and Islam.”  

Since  belief  is  so  tremendously  effective  in  this  world,  certainly  in  the  Eternal 
Realm it will have such fruits and effulgences that they cannot be comprehended with 
the mind in this world, nor described. 

O  you  elderly  people  who  like  me  experience  the  pains  of  separation  from 
numerous friends due to old age! However much older than me in years the oldest of 
you  is,  my  guess  is  that  in  meaning  I  am  older  than  him.  For  since  by  nature  I  feel 
excessive  pity  and  compassion  for  my  fellow  beings,  I  have  experienced  the 
sufferings of thousands of my brothers in addition to my own pains and feel as though 
I have lived for hundreds of years. However much you have suffered the calamity of 
separation,  you have  not suffered it as  I  have. For I have  no son that I should think 
only of  

 

319

him. I feel pain and sympathy towards thousands of Muslim sons and their sorrows, 
and even innocent animals, due to the excessive pity and compassion in my nature. I 
do  not have  a  house  of  my  own that  I  should  think  only  of  it;  I  am  bound  through 
Islamic  zeal  to  this  country  and  even  the  Islamic  world,  as  though  they  were  my 
house. I am saddened at the pains of my  fellow Muslims  in those two great  houses, 
and am sorrowful at being parted from them! 

Thus, the light of belief was sufficient for me and all my sorrows arising from old 
age and the pains of separation; it gave me an inextinguishable hope, an unassailable 
faith,  an  unquenchable  light,  unending  solace.  Belief  then  is  certainly  more  than 
enough for  you  in the face of the darkness,  heedlessness,  sorrows, and griefs of old 
age. In fact, the old age that is utterly black and lacking in light and solace, and is the 
most  grievous  and  terrible  separation,  is  the  old  age  and  separation  suffered  by  the 
people of misguidance and the dissipated. It is possible to experience the belief that 
affords  hope,  light,  and  solace,  and  its  effects  by  adopting a  consciously  worshipful 
attitude,  worthy  of  old  age  and  appropriate  to  Islam.  It  is  not  possible  by  trying  to 
imitate the young, and plunging one’s head into heedlessness and forgetting old age. 

Dwell  on  the  Hadith,  the  meaning  of  which  is:  “The  best  of  the  youths  among 
you are those who imitate those of mature years, while the worst of your elderly are 
those  who  imitate  the  young.”17  That  is  to  say,  “The  best  youths  are  those  who 
resemble the elderly in self-restraint and abstaining from vice, while the worst elderly 
people are those who resemble the young in plunging themselves into dissipation and 
heedlessness. 

My elderly brothers and sisters! There is a Hadith which says: “Divine mercy is 
ashamed  to  leave  unanswered  the  prayers  offered  to  the  divine  court  by  elderly 
believers  of  sixty  or  seventy  years.”18  Seeing  that  divine  mercy  holds  you  in  such 
respect, be respectful towards this respect by performing your worship! 

FOURTEENTH HOPE 

The summary at the start of the Fourth Ray, on the luminous verse “For us God 
suffices,”(3:173)  describes  how  having  been  isolated  from  everything  by  ‘the 
worldly’,  I  was  afflicted  with  five  sorts  of  exile.  The  heedlessness  arising  from 
distress led me to look not to the consoling lights of the  

                                                 

17 ‘Ali Mawardi, Adab al-Dunya wa’l-Din, 27; al-Ghazali, Ihya’ ‘Ulum al-Din, i, 142; al-Munawi, 

Fayd al-Qadir, iii, 487; al-Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, x, 270. 

18 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 244; al-Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, x, 149. 

 

320

Risale-i Nur which would have aided me, but directly to my heart and my spirit. I saw 
that governing in me were an overpowering desire for immortality, an intense love of 
existence,  a  great  yearning  for  life,  together  with  an  infinite  impotence  and  endless 
want.  But  an  awesome  transience  was  extinguishing  the  immortality.  Suffering  this 
state of mind, I exclaimed like the poet: 

Reality wanted the passing of my body, though my heart  

desired its immortality; 

I was afflicted with an incurable ill that not even Luqman could cure! 
I bowed my head in despair. Suddenly the verse, “For us God suffices, and He is 
the Best Disposer of Affairs” came to my  assistance, summoning me to read it with 
attention.  So  I  recited  it  five  hundred  times  every  day.  The  more  I  recited  it,  nine 
levels of meaning were unfolded to me out of its many lights, at the level of ‘certainty 
at the degree of knowledge,’ and even of ‘certainty at the degree of witnessing.’ 

The First Level of the Luminous Verse “For us God suffices” 

By virtue of a shadow in my essential being of a manifestation of a name of the 
One of Glory and Perfection, who, possessing absolute perfection, is of Himself and 
for no other reason worthy of love, I had an innate desire for immortality, directed not 
to  my  own  immortality  but  to  the  existence,  perfection,  and  immortality  of  that 
Absolutely  Perfect  One.  But  due  to  heedlessness  that  innate  love  had  lost  its  way, 
become attached to the shadow and enamoured of the mirror of immortality. Then the 
verse, “For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs” raised the veil. I 
saw and felt and experienced at the degree of ‘absolute certainty’ that the pleasure and 
happiness of my immortality lay exactly and in more perfect form in the immortality 
of  the  Enduring  One  of  Perfection  and  in  affirming  my  Sustainer  and  God,  and  in 
believing in Him, and submitting to Him. The evidence for this has been explained in 
the  Fourth  Ray,  the  treatise  on  the  verse  “For  us  God  suffices,”  in  twelve  sections 
which are extremely profound and subtle and will fill with wonder anyone with fine 
sensibilities. 

The Second Level of the Luminous Verse “For us God suffices” 

At a time when, in my old age, exile, aloneness, and isolation, ‘the worldly’ were 
attacking me with their spies and stratagems despite my boundless innate impotence, I 
told my heart: “Whole armies are attacking a single man whose hands are tied and is 
ill  and  weak.  Is  there  nothing  from  which  he  can  seek  help?”  I  had  recourse  to the 
verse  “For us God suffices and He  is the Best Disposer of Affairs,” and it  informed 
me of the following: 

Through the document of belief, you become connected to a Ruler of  

 

321

Absolute  Power  who  every  spring  equips  in  perfect  order  all  the  plant  and  animal 
armies on the face of the earth composed of four hundred thousand different nations. 
In  addition,  He  places  in  the  ‘extracts’  of  the  Most  Merciful  known  as  seeds  and 
grains, which are like the meat, sugar and other food extracts discovered recently by 
the people of civilization but a hundred times more perfect, all the sustenance of the 
huge armies of foremost man, and of all the animals. He folds up inside those extracts 
the instructions of divine determining concerning their cooking and development, and 
places  them  in  their  tiny  protective  cases.  The  creation of  those tiny  coffers  is  with 
such ease, speed, and abundance from the “Ka\f. Nu\n” factory, which is governed by 
the  command  of  “‘Be!’  and  it  is,”  that  the  Qur’an  states:  “The  Creator  merely 
commands and it comes into being.” Gaining such support with the document of the 
relationship of belief, you can rely on an infinite strength and power. As I assimilated 
this  lesson  from  the  verse,  I  found  such  a  moral  strength  arising  from  belief  that 
through its power I could have challenged not only my present enemies, but the whole 
world. With all my spirit I declared: “For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer 
of Affairs!” 

The Third Level of the Luminous Verse “For us God suffices” 

At a time when, finding my attachment to the world to be broken due to suffering 
the oppression of those exiles and illnesses, belief recalled to me that I was destined 
for perpetual  happiness  in  an  eternal  world,  an everlasting  realm,  I  gave  up  sighing 
regretfully, which caused further grief and yearning, and became cheerful and happy. 
However, this goal of the imagination and spirit and result of man’s nature could only 
be realized through the infinite power of an Absolutely Omnipotent One who knows 
and  records  the  action  and  rest  and  conduct  and  states,  in  word  and  deed,  of  all 
creatures, and takes as His friend and addressee insignificant and absolutely impotent 
man,  giving  him a rank superior to all beings;  it  could only be realized through  His 
infinite favours to man and the importance He gives him. While thinking of these two 
points,  that  is,  the  activity  of  such  a  power  and  the  importance  of  apparently 
insignificant man, I wanted an explanation which would deepen belief and satisfy the 
heart. Again I had recourse to the verse, and it told me to note the “na\,” “For us,” and 
to heed who is saying “For us God suffices” together with me. 

I  at  once  looked  and  saw  that  innumerable  birds  and flies,  which  are  miniature 
birds, and uncountable animals, and boundless plants and trees were, like me, reciting 
through the tongue of disposition “For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of 
Affairs.” They recall to everyone the  

 

322

immensity  and  majesty  of  a  power  which  before  our  eyes  particularly  in  the  spring 
creates  in  most  abundant plenitude,  with the  greatest  ease  and on  a  vast scale,  from 
eggs,  seeds,  grains,  and  droplets  of  fluid,  which  all  resemble  each  other  and  whose 
substance  is  the  same,  the  hundred  thousand  species  of  birds,  the  hundreds  of 
thousands of sorts of animals, the hundred thousand types of plants, and the hundred 
thousand varieties of trees, without error, defect, or confusion, in adorned, balanced, 
well-ordered fashion, and in forms all different from one another. They demonstrate 
to us His unity and oneness by being made in this way together, one within the other 
and resembling each other. I understood that any interference or participation in the 
dominical, creative act of disposal which displays thus incalculable miracles was not 
possible. Those who want to understand my personality and human character, which 
is  like  that  of  all  believers,  and  those  who  want  to  be  like  me,  should  look  at  the 
explanation of the ‘I’ in the first person plural ‘us’ in “For us God suffices,” that is, 
the explanation of myself. What is my apparently insignificant, wanting being – like 
that of all believers? What is life? What is humanity? What is Islam? What is certain, 
affirmative  belief?  What  is  knowledge  of  God?  How  should  love  be?  They  should 
understand and take a lesson! 

The Fourth Level of the Luminous Verse “For us God suffices” 

A time I was being shaken by old age, exile, illness, and defeat coincided with a 
period  of  heedlessness.  I  was  grievously  anxious  that  my  being,  to  which  I  was 
intensely attached and by which I was captivated, indeed all creatures, were departing 
for  non-existence,  then  again  I  had  recourse  to  the  verse.  It  told  me:  “Note  my 
meaning carefully and look through the telescope of belief!” 

So  I  looked  and  with  the  eye  of  belief  and  saw  that  like  all  believers,  my 
miniscule  being  was  the  mirror of  a  limitless  being,  and  through infinite  expansion, 
the means of gaining  innumerable existences, and was a word of wisdom producing 
the fruits of numerous permanent existences far more valuable than itself. I knew with 
‘certainty at the degree of knowledge’ that to live for an instant in this respect was as 
valuable as an eternal existence. For I understood through the consciousness of belief 
that  this  being  of  mine  was  the  work  of  art,  artefact,  and  manifestation  of  the 
Necessarily  Existent  One.  So  being  saved  from  the  anxiety  of  loneliness  and  from 
innumerable separations and their pains, I formed relations and bonds of brotherhood 
with  beings  to  the  number  of  divine  acts  and  names  connected  with  beings  and 
especially  living  beings,  and  I  knew  that  there  was  a  permanent  union  with  all  the 
beings  I  loved,  and  only  a  temporary  separation.  And  so,  through  belief  and  the 
relations of belief, like all beings, my being gained  

 

323

the lights of innumerable existences untouched by separation. Even if it departed, they 
would remain behind and it would be happy as though it had remained itself. 

In  short,  death  is  not  separation,  it  is  union;  it  is  a  change  of  abode;  it  is  the 

producing of an eternal fruit. 

The Fifth Level of the Luminous Verse “For us God suffices” 

Another  time  my  life  was  being  shaken  by  harsh  conditions,  they  directed  my 
attention  towards  life.  I  saw  that  my  life  was  departing  at  speed;  the  hereafter  was 
drawing  close;  due  to  the  oppression  I  was  suffering  my  life  had  started  to  be 
extinguished. As is explained in the section of the Risale-i Nur on the divine name of 
Ever-Living,  I  thought  sorrowfully  of  how  with  its  important  functions,  and  great 
benefits  and  virtues,  life  did  not  deserve  to  be  so  swiftly  extinguished  but  to  last  a 
long time. I again had recourse to my master, the verse, “For us God suffices, and He 
is the Best Disposer of Affairs.” This time it told me: “Consider life from the point of 
view of the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One, who gives you life!” 

So I looked and I saw that if only one aspect of my life looked to me, a hundred 
looked to the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One. And if, of its results, one looked 
to me, a thousand looked to my Creator. Since this is the case, to live for one instant 
within  the  bounds  of  divine  pleasure  is  sufficient;  a  long  time  is  not  required.  This 
truth may be explained in four matters. Anyone who is not dead or who wants to be 
alive should seek the nature and reality of life and its true rights in those four matters; 
they will find them and be raised to life! 

A  summary  is  this:  the  more  life  looks  to  the  Ever-Living  and  Self-Subsistent 
One,  and  the  more  belief  becomes  the  life  and  spirit  of  life,  the  more  it  becomes 
perpetual and produces enduring fruits. It also becomes so elevated that it receives the 
manifestation of eternity; it no longer looks to the brevity or length of a lifetime. 

The Sixth Level of the Luminous Verse “For us God suffices” 

At  a  time  when  my  advancing  years  and  old  age  were  giving  warning  of  my 
particular parting amid the events of the end of time, which tell of the destruction of 
the world, the time of general parting, the feelings in my nature of love of beauty and 
in  an 
passion  for  loveliness  and  fascination  by  perfection  were  unfolding 
extraordinarily  sensitive  manner.  I  saw  with  extraordinary  clarity  and  sorrow  that 
transience  and  decline,  which  are  always  destructive,  and  death  and  non-existence, 
which perpetually cause separations, were tearing apart this beautiful world and these 
beautiful creatures in terrible fashion, and destroying their beauty. The metaphorical 
love  

 

324

in my nature boiled up and rebelled against this situation. In order to find consolation, 
I again  had recourse to the  verse “For us God suffices.”  It told me: “Recite me and 
consider my meaning carefully!” 

So I entered the observatory of the verse in Sura al-Nur,  

God  is  the  Light  of  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  [to  the  end  of  the 
verse],(24:35)  

and looked through the telescope of belief to the most distant levels of the verse “For 
us  God  suffices,”  then  through  the  microscope  of  the  insight  of  belief  at  its  most 
subtle mysteries, and saw the following: 

Mirrors, pieces of  glass, transparent things, and even bubbles, show the  various 
hidden  beauties  of  the  sun’s  light  and  of  the  seven  colours  in  its  light;  and  through 
their disappearance and renewal, and different capacities and refractions, they renew 
that beauty; and with their reflections, they display the hidden beauties and loveliness 
of  the  sun  and  its  light.  In  exactly  the  same  way,  in  order  to  act  as  mirrors  to  the 
sacred   beauty  of  the  All-Beauteous  One  of  Glory,  the  Pre-Eternal  and  Post-Eternal 
Sun, and to the everlasting loveliness of His most beautiful names, and to renew their 
manifestations, these beautiful creatures, these lovely artefacts, these exquisite beings, 
arrive  and  depart  without  stopping.  Powerful  proofs  are  expounded  in  detail  in  the 
Risale-i Nur that demonstrate that the beauties apparent on them belong not to them, 
but are signs, indications, flashes, and manifestations of a transcendent, sacred beauty 
which wants to become manifest. The explanation begins by saying that three of those 
proofs  have  been  mentioned  briefly  and  most  reasonably.  The  treatise  leaves  in 
amazement everyone of fine perception who sees it so that  in  addition to benefiting 
from  it  themselves,  they  find  it  necessary  to  try  to  allow  others  to  benefit  from  it. 
Anyone whose mind is not rotten and heart not corrupted, will appreciate, admire, and 
recommend  the  five  points  explained  in  the  second  proof,  and  exclaiming: 
“Ma’shallah!  Barakallah!”  will  perceive  and  affirm  that  it  is  a  wondrous  marvel 
which will exalt his apparently lowly, wanting being. 
FIFTEENTH HOPE19 

One time when I was in compulsory residence in Emirdağ,20 in what  

                                                 

19 This Fifteenth Hope was written by a Nurju to complete in the future the Treatise for the 
Elderly, and as a source for its composition, since the period of the Risale-i Nur’s writing had come to 
an end three years’ previously. 

20 The small town in central Anatolia where Bediuzzaman was exiled in 1944, following his 
release from Denizli Prison. He remained in compulsory residence here until 1951, with a break of 
twenty months in Afyon Prison, from January 1948 to September 1949. (Tr.) 

 

325

was virtually solitary confinement, I became wearied of life due to the torments they 
inflicted on me with their surveillance and arbitrary treatment, which I found hard to 
bear,  and  I  regretted  having  been  released  from  prison.  I  longed  for  Denizli  Prison 
with all my spirit, and wanted to enter the grave. But while thinking, prison and the 
grave are preferable to such a life, and deciding to enter one or the other, divine grace 
came to my assistance: it bestowed on the students of the Medresetü’z-Zehra,21 whose 
pens were  like duplicating machines, one of the  machines, which  had just appeared. 
All at once, five  hundred copies each of the  valuable collections of the  Risale-i Nur 
appeared  from  a  single  pen.  Their  presaging  new  victories  made  me  love  that 
distressing life, and caused me to offer unending thanks. 

A  while  later,  unable  to  endure  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  victories,  its  covert  enemies 
prompted the government to act against us. Again life became difficult for me. Then 
suddenly dominical grace was manifested: the officials connected with the case, who 
were  those  most  in  need  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  studied  the  confiscated  copies  in  the 
course of their duties most curiously and carefully, and its treatises gave their hearts a 
sense  of  bias  towards  it.  As  they  began  to  appreciate  it  rather  than  criticize  it,  the 
Risale-i  Nur’s  circle  of  study  greatly  expanded.  It  produced profits  a  hundred  times 
greater than our material losses, reducing to nothing our anxiety and distress. 

Then, secret, hostile dissemblers directed the government’s attention towards my 
person.  They  recalled  my  former  political  activities.  They  aroused  suspicions  about 
me in both the judiciary, and the education authorities, and the police, and the Home 
Affairs Office. These spread at the hand of the different parties and the incitement of 
concealed  communist  anarchists.  They  started  to  pressure  us  and  arrest  us,  and 
confiscate the parts of the Risale-i Nur that fell into their hands. The activities of the 
Risale-i  Nur  students  came  to  a  standstill.  A  number  of  officials  made  false 
accusations which  no one at all  could believe. They tried to spread around the most 
extraordinary slander, but they could make no one believe it.  

Then they arrested me during the coldest days of winter on some trite  

                                                 

21 The name of the university Bediuzzaman strove throughout his life to found in eastern Anatolia, 

where the religious sciences would be taught together with the modern sciences.  He received funds 
from Sultan Reşad and laid the foundations on the shores of Lake Van in 1911, but it was not 
completed due to the outbreak of World War I. With the spread of the Risale-i Nur in the first decades 
of the republic, Risale-i Nur Medreses, or places where the Risale-i Nur was studied or copies of it 
were written, opened throughout Turkey. Bediuzzaman then called the Risale-i Nur students, students 
of the Medresetü’z-Zehra. (Tr.) 

 

326

pretext, and put me into solitary confinement in prison in a large and extremely cold 
ward,  leaving  me  two  days  without  a  stove.  I  was  accustomed  to  light  my  stove 
several times a day in my small room and always had live coals in the brazier, so with 
my  illness  and  weakness  I  could  endure  it  only  with  difficulty.  While  struggling  in 
this situation suffering from both a fever and the cold, and dreadful distress and anger, 
a truth unfolded in my heart through divine grace. It uttered the following warning to 
my spirit: 

“You called prison the Medrese-i Yûsufiye – the School of the Prophet Joseph, 
and while in Denizli, things like relief a thousand times greater than your distress, and 
spiritual  profit,  and  the  other  prisoners  benefiting  from  the  Risale-i  Nur,  and  its 
widespread triumphs, all made you offer endless thanks instead of complaining. They 
made  each  hour  of  your  imprisonment  and  hardship  the  equivalent  of  ten  hours’ 
worship, and made those passing hours eternal. God willing, the calamity-stricken in 
this third School of Joseph benefiting  from the Risale-i Nur and finding consolation 
will heat this cold, severe distress of yours and transform it into joy. If the people you 
are angry at are being deceived and are ill-treating  you without realizing it, they are 
not worth being angry at. And if they are tormenting  you and causing  you suffering 
knowingly, out of spite and on account of misguidance, they will in a short time enter 
the solitary  confinement of the  grave due to the eternal execution of death, to suffer 
everlasting  torment  and  torture.  Their  oppression  is  earning  for  you  both  merit  and 
spiritual  pleasures,  and  is  making  transient  hours  eternal,  and  is  allowing  you  to 
perform scholarly and religious duties with sincerity.” 

With  all  my  strength  I  exclaimed:  “All  praise  be  to  God!”  Out  of  humanity,  I 
pitied  those  tyrants  and  prayed:  “O  my  Sustainer,  reform  them!”  As  I  wrote  in  my 
statement to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, in this new incident the truly guilty are 
those tyrants who in ten respects act unlawfully  in the name of the law. They  found 
extraordinary  pretexts  showing  to  anyone  fair-minded  with  their  slanders  and 
fabrications, which would have made those who heard them  laugh and lovers of the 
truth  weep,  that  they  can  find  no  way  to  attack  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  its  students  in 
respect of the law and right, so deviate into lunacy. 

For  instance,  the  officials  who  spied  on  us  for  a  month  could  find  nothing 
incriminating, so they wrote out a memorandum saying: “Said’s servants bought rak› 
from a shop and took it to him.” They could find no one to sign the memo, but finally 
arrested  a drunken  stranger  and  got  him  to sign it  under  threat.  Even  he  said:  “God 
forgive us! Who would sign this extraordinary lie?” So they were compelled to tear it 
up. 

 

327

A  S e c o n d  E x a m p l e : Someone I did not know and still do not know, lent 
his horse so that I could go out for a ride. I used to go out most days for a couple of 
hours in the summer, for my illness and to take some air. I had given my word that I 
would  give  the  owner  of  the  horse  and  phaeton books  worth fifty  liras,  so  as  not to 
break my rule and become indebted to him. Could any  harm come of such a thing? 
But then both the Governor, and the court officials, and the police questioned us fifty 
times  about  the  horse’s  owner.  As  though  it  were  some  important  political  event 
affecting  public  security!  One  person  even  said  loyally  that  the  horse  was  his  and 
another,  that  the  phaeton  was  his,  in  order  to  put  a  stop  to  this  meaningless 
questioning,  and  they  were  both  arrested  together  with  me.  We  watched  numerous 
childish  escapades  like  these  two  examples  and  laughed  till  we  cried.  And  we 
understood  that  those  who  attack  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  its  students  make  fools  of 
themselves. 

An amusing incident from among those examples: the reason given on the paper 
authorizing my arrest was “disturbing public order.” Not having seen the document, I 
told the public prosecutor: “I slandered  you last night. I said to a police officer who 
was  questioning  me  for  the  Police  Chief:  ‘If  I  haven’t  served  this  country’s  public 
security as much as a thousand public prosecutors and a thousand police chiefs – three 
times – may God damn me!’” 

Just at that point, when in those freezing conditions I was in most need of rest and 
not  catching  cold  and  not  thinking  of  the  world,  I  was  overcome  with  anger  and 
vexation at those who had sent me into this intolerable exile, isolation, imprisonment, 
and  oppression,  in  a  way  that  spelt  out  their  hatred  and  ill-intentions.  Divine  grace 
came to my assistance, and the following was imparted to my heart: 

“Divine  determining,  which  is  pure  justice,  has  a  large  part  in  the  wrongful 
oppression  which  these  people  are  inflicting  on  you.  You  have  food  to  eat  in  this 
prison;  that  sustenance  of  yours  called  you  here. It  should be  met  with  contentment 
and  resignation.  Dominical  wisdom  and  mercy  have  a  large  part,  which  is  to 
illuminate those in this prison and console them, and to gain  you reward. This share 
should be met with endless thanks and patience. Your soul has a part in it, due to its 
faults which you did not know about. In the face of this, you should tell your soul by 
repenting  and  seeking  forgiveness  that  it  deserved  this  blow.  Some  of  your  secret 
enemies  have  a  part  in  it,  with  their  intrigues  and  deceiving  certain  ingenuous  and 
suspicious officials and inciting them to such oppression. In the face of this share, the 
terrible immaterial blows dealt by the Risale-i Nur on those dissemblers have avenged 
you completely. That is enough for them. The final  

 

328

part is the officials who were the actual means. In the face of this share, it is an act of 
magnanimity to forgive them in accordance with the rule,  

Those who suppress their anger and forgive people—verily God loves those 
who do good,(3:134)  

for whether they wanted to or not they may  have benefited from the Risale-i Nur in 
respect of belief, although they looked at with the intention of criticizing it. 

I  felt  such  happiness  and  gratitude  at  this  veracious  warning  that  I  decided  to 
commit some harmless offence and incur a prison sentence, so that I might remain in 
this new School of Joseph and perhaps even help those who were opposed to me. For 
someone like me who was seventy-five  years old, without attachment, and only five 
out  of  the  seventy  people  he  loved  in  this  world  remained  alive,  the  grave  was  a 
hundred times preferable to this prison. For seventy thousand copies of the treatises of 
the Risale-i Nur were in free circulation and would perform my duties connected with 
the Risale-i Nur, and I had brothers and heirs who would continue to serve belief with 
thousands of tongues in place of my one tongue. This prison too was a hundred times 
more comfortable and more beneficial than the unfree  liberty outside subject to that 
tyranny and oppression. For in place of having to suffer all alone outside the arbitrary 
treatment of hundreds of officials, in prison, together with hundreds of other prisoners 
one  only  has  to  suffer  the  slight  arbitrariness  of  one  or  two  people  like  the  prison 
governor  and  chief  warder,  which  will  yield  benefits.  And  in  the  face  of  this,  one 
receives  the  brotherly  kindness  and  consolation  of  many  fellow-prisoners.  With  the 
thought that the compassion of Islam and human nature are shown as kindness to the 
elderly  in  such  a  position,  thus  turning the  hardship  of prison  into  mercy,  I  became 
resigned to prison. 

At the time I attended this third trial, because of my difficulty in remaining on my 
feet  due  to  weakness,  old  age,  and  illness,  I  sat  on  a  chair  outside  the  door  of  the 
court. The judge suddenly appeared and angrily asked in insulting manner: “Why isn’t 
he waiting on his feet?” I was angry at this unkindness in the face of my old age. Then 
I looked  and  saw  that  a  large  number of Muslims  had gathered  around us  and  were 
watching  in  most  kind  and  brotherly  fashion,  and  not  dispersing.  I  was  suddenly 
warned of the following two truths: 

T h e  F i r s t : The covert enemies of myself and the Risale-i Nur had deceived 
certain  ingenuous  officials  with  the  intention  of  putting  a  stop  to  the  Risale-i  Nur’s 
conquests by destroying the public’s good opinion of me, which in any event I did not 
want, and of destroying my character in  

 

329

the  people’s  view;  they  had  prompted  those officials  to  act contemptuously  towards 
me in that way. See these hundred people in place of that one man’s insults! In return 
for the Risale-i Nur’s service to belief – as a divine favour – they are kindly offering 
their sympathy by appreciating your service, and both welcoming you and seeing you 
off. Even, while I was in the examining magistrate’s office on the second day of the 
trial answering the public prosecutor’s questions, around a thousand people gathered 
in the courtyard opposite the court windows and showed their concern; they appeared 
to be telling them through the tongue of disposition not to pressurize us. The police 
could not make them disperse. It was imparted to my heart that in this dangerous age 
these people want a true solace, an inextinguishable light, powerful belief, and certain 
good  news  about  eternal  happiness,  and  that  they  search  for  these  by  nature.  They 
must have heard that what they are searching for is to be found in the Risale-i Nur so 
that they show my unimportant person much more attention than I deserve because I 
have performed some small services for belief. 

S e c o n d  T r u t h : I was reminded that in return for the ill-treatment a few 
contemptuous, deceived individuals inflicted on us with the  intention of insulting us 
and  destroying  public  regard  for  us,  due  to  their  unfounded  suspicions  of  our 
disturbing public order, was the applause and appreciation of innumerable people of 
reality and forthcoming generations. 

Yes,  through  the  strength  of  certain,  affirmative  belief,  in  every  part  of  this 
country the  Risale-i Nur and its students halt the  awesome corruption and efforts of 
anarchy to destroy public order under the veil of communism. They work to maintain 
public order and security so that these twenty years three or four related courts and the 
police of ten provinces  have  not been able to find or record any  incidents  involving 
the  infringement  of  public  order  connected  with  the  Risale-i  Nur  students,  who  are 
very numerous and found in every part of the country. And the fair-minded police of 
three provinces stated: “The Risale-i Nur students are moral police. They assist us in 
preserving public order. Through certain, affirmative belief, they leave in everyone’s 
head  who  reads  the  Risale-i  Nur  something  that  restrains  them  from  committing 
misdemeanours. They work to maintain public order.” 

An example of this was Denizli Prison. When the Risale-i Nur entered there and 
Fruits of Belief was written for the prisoners, within a space of three or four months 
more  than  two  hundred  of  those  prisoners  became  so  extraordinarily  obedient  and 
acquired such religious and righteous conduct that a man who had murdered three or 
four  people  refrained  from  killing  bedbugs  even.  They  became  completely 
compassionate, harmless members  

 

330

of  the  nation.  The  officials  were  astonished  at  this  situation  and  looked  on  in 
appreciation. Some  youths even said before receiving their sentences: “If the Nurjus 
remain in prison, we shall try to have ourselves convicted so that we can be taught by 
them and become like them. We shall reform ourselves through their instruction.” 

So those who accuse the Risale-i Nur students, who are thus, of disturbing public 
order  are  surely  seriously  deceived,  or  have  been  fooled,  or  knowingly  or 
unknowingly  are  deceiving  the  government  on  account of  anarchy,  and  try  to  crush 
and repress us. We say this to them:  

Since death is not to be killed, and the grave is not to be closed, and the travellers 
in this guesthouse of the world, convoy after convoy enter the earth with great speed 
and  ado,  and  vanish;  for  sure  we  shall  part  from  one  another  very  soon.  You  shall 
receive  the  penalty  for  your  tyranny  in  awful  fashion.  At  the  very  least  you  shall 
mount the gallows of death and eternal extinction, which form the discharge papers of 
the oppressed people of belief. The fleeting pleasures you have received in this world 
imagining them to be everlasting, will be transformed into everlasting, grievous pains. 
Regretfully, our secret dissembling enemies sometimes attach the name of Sufism 
to the reality of Islam, which has been gained and preserved through the swords and 
blood of the hundred million martyrs at the rank of saints, and heroic war veterans of 
this  religious  nation.  While  the  way  of  Sufism  is  only  a  single  ray  of  that  sun,  they 
show it to be the sun and deceive certain lax government officials. Calling the Risale-i 
Nur  students  “Sufis”  and  “members  of  a  political  society”  –  because  they  work 
effectively for the truths of the Qur’an and belief – they  want to incite them against 
us. We say to them, and to those who listen to them against us, what we told the just 
court at Denizli: 

“Let us too be sacrificed for this  sacred truth for which  hundreds of millions of 
people  have  been  sacrificed!  Even  if  you  set  fire  to  the  world  around  us,  we  who 
sacrifice  ourselves  for  the  truths  of  the  Qur’an  will  not  lay  down  our  arms  before 
atheism; we shall not abandon our sacred duty, God willing!” 

Thanks to the sacred solace arising from belief and the Qur’an for the pains and 
despair at the  adventures of my old age, I would not exchange this most distressing 
year  of  my  old  age  for  ten  of  the  happiest  years  of  my  youth  –  especially  since  for 
those  who  repent  and  perform  the  obligatory  prayers  each  hour  in  prison  is  the 
equivalent of ten hours’ worship, and with respect to merit, each transient day spent in 
illness and under oppression gains ten days of perpetual life. I thus understood from 
those  warnings  just  how  deserving  of  thanks  are  these  days  for  someone  like  me 
awaiting his  

 

331

turn at the door of the grave. I exclaimed: “Endless thanks be to my Sustainer!”, and 
was happy at my old age and pleased with my imprisonment. For life does not stop, it 
passes swiftly. If it passes in pleasure and happiness, since the passing of pleasure is 
pain, it becomes transient, passing without thanks and in heedlessness; leaving sins in 
the place of pleasures, it departs. Whereas if it passes in prison and hardship, since the 
passing of pain is a sort of pleasure, and since it is considered to be a sort of worship, 
it becomes perpetual in one respect, and through its good fruits gains everlasting life. 
It  becomes  atonement  for  the  mistakes  that  were  the  cause  of  past  sins  and 
imprisonment, and purifies them. From this point of view, the prisoners who perform 
the compulsory parts of the obligatory prayers should offer thanks in patience. 

SIXTEENTH HOPE 

One  time  in  my  old  age,  I  was  released  from  Eskişehir  Prison  after  serving  a 
years’  sentence.  They  exiled  me  to  Kastamonu,22  where  I  stayed  for  two  or  three 
months  as  a  guest  in  the  police  station.  It  may  be  understood  how  much  torment 
someone like me suffered in a place like that, who was a recluse, wearied by seeing 
even  his  loyal  friends,  and  could  not  endure  the  changes  in  dress.23  While  suffering 
this  despair,  divine  grace  suddenly  came  to  the  assistance  of  my  old  age.  The 
inspector  and  police  in  the  police  station  became  like  firm  friends.  They  not  once 
warned me about not wearing a peaked cap, and like my servants, used to take me for 
trips around the town. 

Then  I  took  up  residence  in  Kastamonu’s  Risale-i  Nur  Medrese,  opposite  the 
police  station,  and  started  to  write  further  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur.  Heroic  Risale-i 
Nur  students  like  Feyzi,  Emin,  Hilmi,  Sâdık,  Nazif,  and  Salâhaddin,  attended  the 
medrese in  order  to duplicate  the  treatises  and disseminate  them.  We  held  scholarly 
debates even more brilliant than those I had held in my youth with my old students. 

Then  our  hidden  enemies  aroused  the  suspicions  of  some  officials  and  some 
egotistical hojas and shaykhs concerning us. They caused us and Risale-i Nur students 
from five or six provinces to be gathered together in the School of Joseph of Denizli 
Prison.  The  details of  this  Sixteenth  Hope are described  clearly  in  the  brief  letters  I 
sent secretly to my brothers while  

                                                 

22 A provincial centre in the İlgaz Mountains to the north of Turkey. Bediuzzaman was exiled 
here in March 1936, after being released from Eskişehir Prison. He remained in Kastamonu for seven 
years, until 1943, when he was sent to Denizli Prison. (Tr.) 

23 This refers to the compulsory adoption of European dress following the Dress Laws passed in 

the first years of the Republic. The Hat Act of 1925 banned the wearing of all headgear other than 
European-style hats. (Tr.) 

 

332

in Denizli Prison, in those sent from Kastamonu, and in the collection containing the 
court  defence  speeches.  So  referring  the  details  to  those  letters  and  to  my  defence 
speech, I shall allude to it only very briefly here: 

I hid the confidential and important collections, and particularly those about the 
Sufyan and the Risale-i Nur’s wonder-working, under the coal and fire-wood so that 
they  might  be  published  after  my  death  or  after  the  authorities  had  come  to  their 
senses and listened to the truth. Then, when feeling easy at this, some detectives and 
the assistant public prosecutor suddenly raided my house. They pulled out those secret 
and important treatises from under the wood then arrested me and sent me to Isparta 
Prison, although I was in bad health. While greatly upset and sad at the harm that had 
come to the Risale-i Nur, divine grace came to our aid. The authorities carefully and 
curiously  began  to  read  those  important  treatises  which  had  been  hidden,  of  which 
they were in much need, and the government offices became like Risale-i Nur study 
centres.  Although  they  began  to  read  with  the  idea  of  criticizing,  they  appreciated 
them.  In  Denizli  even,  although  we  were  unaware  of  it,  numerous  people  read  the 
printed edition of Ayetü’l-Kübra (The Supreme Sign), officially and unofficially, and 
strengthened  their  belief.  This  reduced  to  nothing  the  calamity  of  prison  we  were 
suffering. 

Later  they  took  us  to  Denizli  Prison  and  put me  into  solitary  confinement  in  a 
stinking,  cold,  damp  ward.  I  was  most  unhappy  at  my  old  age  and  illness  and  the 
difficulties visited on my friends because of me. I was feeling most distressed at the 
confiscations of the Risale-i Nur and the cessation in its activities when divine grace 
suddenly came to my aid. It transformed that huge prison into a Risale-i Nur medrese, 
proving  it  was  a  School  of  Joseph.  The  Risale-i  Nur  started  to  spread  through  the 
diamond pens of the heroes of the Medresetü’z-Zehra.24 The great hero of the Risale-i 
Nur even, in those severe conditions, wrote out more than twenty copies of The Fruits 
of Belief  and  the  Defence Speeches  Collection  in  the  space  of  three  or  four  months. 
The conquests began both within the prison and outside. It transformed our losses in 
that calamity into significant gains and our distress into joy. It once again showed the 
meaning of the verse,   

But it is possible that you dislike a thing which is good for you.(2:216) 

Then we were subject to severe criticisms because of the incorrect and superficial 
statements  of  the  first  experts’  committee,  and  the  Education  Minister’s  savage 
attacks.  A  statement  was  published  against  us.  Then  just  when  according  to  some 
reports they were even trying to secure the execu 

                                                 
24 See note 21, page 325. 

 

333

tion  of  some  of  us,  divine  grace came  to  our  assistance.  Chiefly,  while  expecting  a 
severely  critical  report  from  the  Experts  Committee  in  Ankara,  they  sent  a 
commendatory  one.  And  although  they  found  less  than  ten  errors  in  five  chests  of 
copies  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  we proved  in  court  that  the  points  they  had  shown  to be 
errors  were  completely  correct  and  that  they  themselves  had  been  in  error  in  the 
matters they said were wrong; we showed between five and ten errors and mistakes in 
their five-page report. And while awaiting severe reprisals in the face of The Fruits of 
Belief and Defences Collection, which we had sent to seven government offices, and 
the entire Risale-i Nur which had been sent to the Ministry of Justice, and especially 
in  return  for  the  effective,  stinging  slaps  dealt  by  the  confidential  treatises,  they 
responded  extremely  leniently,  and  like  the  even  consoling  letter  sent  to  us  by  the 
Prime  Minister,  they  were  most  conciliatory  and  did  not  attack  us.  This  proved 
decisively that as a miracle of divine grace, the truths of the Risale-i Nur had defeated 
them, making them study its treatises as though it were a guide. It made those broad 
circles  into  a  sort  of  study  circle  and  saved  the  belief  of  numerous  hesitating  and 
bewildered people, causing us spiritual joy and profit far exceeding our distress.   

Then our hidden enemies poisoned me; and the late Haf›z Ali, the martyr hero of 
the Risale-i Nur, went to hospital instead of me, travelled to the Intermediate Realm 
in my place, and made us weep despairingly. Before this calamity, on many occasions 
I  had  insisted  on  the  mountain  at  Kastamonu:  “My  brothers, don’t  give  meat  to the 
horse and grass to the lion!” That is to say: “Don’t give all the treatises to everyone, 
lest they use them to attack us.” Although Haf›z Ali (May God have mercy on him) 
was around seven days away on foot, as though he heard with his spiritual telephone, 
that same time he was writing to me: “Yes, Ustad, it is a wonder of the Risale-i Nur 
that horses should not be given meat, nor lions, grass. Rather, since horses should be 
given  hay,  and  lions  meat,  he  gave  that  lion-like  Hoja  the  treatise  on  sincerity.”  I 
received  his  letter  seven  days  later.  We  worked  it  out,  and  at  the  same  time  I  was 
shouting it out on the mountain, he was writing the strange words in his letter. 

Thus,  just  at  the  time  that  hero  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  died,  and  we  were  being 
pressurized  by  the  secret  dissemblers  who  were  trying  to  have  us  punished  through 
their  intrigues  against  us,  and  we  were  anxious  that  I  would  be  sent  to  hospital  on 
official  orders  because  I  was  ill  from  poison,  divine  grace  came  to  our  assistance. 
Thanks to the sincere prayers of my blessed brothers the danger to my  life from the 
poison passed; and according to powerful signs our martyr was occupied in his grave 
with the Risale-i Nur, and replied with the Risale-i Nur to the questioning angels; and 
the  

 

334

Denizli hero, Hasan Feyzi (May God have mercy on him), who would work according 
to  Hafız  Ali’s  system,  and  his  friends  were  secretly  serving  the  Risale-i  Nur 
effectively; and because the other prisoners were being reformed by the Risale-i Nur, 
even our enemies supported our being released from prison; and like the Companions 
of the Cave, the Risale-i Nur students turned that place of ordeal into an ascetic’s cave 
of  olden  times;  all  this,  together  with  their  endeavours  in  writing  out  and 
disseminating the Risale-i Nur with easy hearts, proved that divine grace had come to 
our aid.   

It  also  occurred  to  my  heart  that  since  a  great  interpreter  of  the  law  like  Imam 
A‘zam suffered imprisonment; and a supreme mujahid like Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal 
was  severely  tortured  in  prison  for  the  sake  of  a  single  matter  of  the  Qur’an  and 
endured it in perfect patience, yet not remain silent about the matter in question; and 
numerous  religious  leaders  and  scholars  were  completely  patient  and  unshaken, 
offering  thanks,  despite  suffering  torments  far  greater  than  yours;  for  sure  you  are 
obliged to offer endless thanks  for the  very  few  difficulties  you suffer, although the 
reward you receive is great for those many truths of the Qur’an. Yes, I shall describe 
briefly a manifestation of divine grace in the midst of man’s wrongful tyranny: 

When  I was twenty  years old I used to say repeatedly: “Towards the end of my 
life I shall withdraw from the life of society into a cave or onto a mountain  like the 
people  of  olden  times  who  abandoned  the  world  and  withdrew  into  caves.”  Then 
when  in  the  Great  War  I  was  being  held  as  a  prisoner  in  the  north-east,  I  took  this 
decision: “After this I shall spend my life in caves. I shall slip away from political and 
social life. Enough  now of mixing in them.” At that point both dominical  grace and 
the  justice  of  divine  determining  were  manifested.  It  transformed  the  caves  I  had 
imagined into prisons, places of seclusion, loneliness in places of ordeal and solitary 
confinement in a way far better than my decision and wish, compassionately for my 
old  age.  It  bestowed  on  me  Schools  of  Joseph  and  places  of  solitary  confinement 
where my time would not be wasted that were far superior to the mountain caves of 
ascetics and recluses. It gave both the benefits pertaining to the hereafter of the cave, 
and strenuous service of the truths of belief and the Qur’an. I had even determined to 
show  myself  guilty  of  some  crime  and  remain  in  prison  after  my  friends  had  been 
released. Solitaries like Husrev and Feyzi would have remained with me, and on some 
pretext I would have remained in the solitary confinement ward so as not to meet with 
people  and  waste  my  time  on  unnecessary  conversation  and  egotistical  artificiality. 
But then divine determining and our  

 

335

fate sent us to another place of ordeal. Out of compassion for my old age and in order 
to make us work harder in the service of belief, duties were given us outside our will 
and  power  in  this  third  School  of  Joseph,  in  accordance  with  the  verse,  “But  it  is 
possible that you dislike a thing which is good for you,” and the saying: “Good lies in 
what God chooses.”  

Yes, there are three instances of wisdom and important benefits in respect of the 
service of the Risale-i Nur in divine grace turning – out of compassion for my old age 
– the caves of my  youth, when  I  had no powerful,  hidden enemies, into the solitary 
confinement of prison: 

First Instance of Wisdom and Benefit: It is only in the School of Joseph that the 
Risale-i  Nur  students can  gather  together  without  harm.  Outside  it  is  expensive  and 
causes suspicion if they meet together. Some who came to visit me would spend forty 
or  fifty  liras,  then  see  me  for  only  twenty  minutes  or  not  at  all,  and  would  have  to 
return. I would have willingly chosen the  hardship of prison to be closer to some of 
my brothers. This means that for us prison is a bounty and instance of mercy. 

Second  Instance  of  Wisdom  and  Benefit:  The  service  to  belief  at  this  time 
through the Risale-i Nur has to be through advertising it everywhere and attracting the 
attention  of  those  in  need.  Attention  is  drawn  to  the  Risale-i  Nur  by  our 
imprisonment;  it  is  like  an  advertisement.  The  most  stubborn  or  most  needy  find  it 
and  save  their  belief; their  obduracy  is  broken  and  they  are  saved  from danger,  and 
the Risale-i Nur’s study-circle is widened. 

Third Instance of Wisdom and Benefit: The Risale-i Nur students who are sent 
to prison learn from one another’s conduct, qualities, sincerity, and self-sacrifice, and 
they  no  longer  seek  worldly  benefits  in  their  service.  Yes,  since  in  the  School  of 
Joseph  they  have  seen  with  their  own  eyes  the  ten  and  perhaps  a  hundred  benefits 
gained for every hardship and difficulty, and the good results, and the extensive and 
sincere service to belief, they are successful in attaining pure sincerity and no longer 
lower themselves by seeking minor, personal benefits. 

A subtle but sad, yet at the same time agreeable, point concerning these places of 
ordeal that concerns myself only is this: I observe the same situation here that I saw in 
the  old  medreses  in  my  native  region  in  my  youth.  For  traditionally  in  the  eastern 
provinces, some of the medrese students’ needs were met from outside, and in some 
medreses  their  food  was  cooked  in  the  medrese.  There  were  other  ways  they 
resembled this place of ordeal. As I watch the prison here, I feel a pleasurable regret 
and  longing,  and  travel  in  my  imagination  to  those  enjoyable  times  of  youth,  and 
forget the difficulties of old age. 

 

 

336

The Addendum to the Twenty-Sixth Flash 

 
This is the Twenty-First Letter, which, having been included in Mektûbat (Letters 

1928-1932), has not been added here. 

*   *   * 
 
 
 
 
The Twenty-Seventh Flash 

 
This consists of the defence speeches from the Eskişehir trials, which have been 
published  in  the  hand-duplicated  editions  of  The  Flashes  Collection,  and  in  part  in 
biography. 
 
 
 
 
 

*   *   * 

  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

337

The Twenty-Eighth Flash 

[This  Flash  comprises  some  of  the  short  pieces  I  wrote  as 
consolation for my brothers who were (in the ward) opposite 
me in Eskişehir Prison, at a time I was forbidden to mix with 
them or speak with them.] 

An amusing and absorbing conversation with Süleyman Rüştü,1 
famous for his fidelity and distinguished by his sincerity of heart 

A Small Point Concerning an Important Verse 

It  was  autumn  and  approaching  the  time  flies  are  discharged  from  their  duties, 
and because of their minor annoyance, selfish  humans were employing chemicals  in 
my prison cell in order to eliminate them. It aroused a sharp pity in me. There was a 
washing-line in my cell. In order to thwart the humans the flies multiplied even more. 
In the evening those miniature birds would line themselves up in most orderly fashion 
on the line. When he wanted to hang up the washing, I said to Rüﬂtü: “Don’t disturb 
those little birds; hang it somewhere else.” To which he replied, completely seriously: 
“We need the line; let the flies find somewhere else for themselves.” 

Anyhow...  In  the  early  morning  a  discussion  started up  in  connection  with  this 
exchange,  about  the  very  numerous  small  creatures  like  flies  and  ants.  I  said  the 
following to him: 

                                                 

1 Süleyman Rüştü Çakın, 1899-1974. He was born in Isparta where he was the Director of the Tax 
Assessment Office. He became one of Bediuzzaman’s close students and was imprisoned together with 
him in Eskişehir and Denizli. 

 

338

The  species  whose  copies  are  thus  numerous  have  important  duties  and  great 
value,  like  the  copies  of  a  book  are  multiplied  in  relation to  the  book’s  importance. 
That is to say, the species of flies have important duties and high value so that the All-
Wise  Creator  has  greatly  multiplied  those  tiny  missives  of  divine  determining  and 
copies of the words of divine power. The All-Wise Qur’an states: 

O  men!  Here  is  a  parable  set  forth;  listen  to  it!  Those  on  whom  you  call 
besides  God  cannot  create  [even]  a  fly,  if  they  all  met  together  for  the 
purpose! And if the fly should snatch away anything from them, they would 
have no power to release it from the fly. Feeble are those who petition and 
those whom they petition!(22:73) 

That is to say, if those things claimed to be gods by the people of misguidance were to 
gather  together  all  causes  and  false  gods  apart  from  God  Almighty,  they  would  be 
unable to create even a fly. That is, the creation of a fly is such a dominical miracle 
and clear sign of the creative act that even if all causes were to assemble they would 
be unable to make anything like it or to duplicate it, and would be unable to dispute 
that dominical sign. 

Flies,  the  significant  subject  of  the  above  verse,  defeated  Nimrod,  and  when 
Moses (Upon whom be peace) complained about their bothering him, saying: “O my 
Sustainer!  Why  have  You  made  these  irritating  creatures  so  very  numerous?”,  the 
following answer came to him by way of inspiration: 

“You have objected about the flies once while the flies have asked many times: 
‘O our Sustainer! This man has a huge head, yet he praises You with only one tongue, 
and sometimes he neglects to do that. If you had created us out of only his head, there 
would have been creatures like us praising You with thousands of tongues!’” 

Moreover  the  flies,  which  thus  defended  the  wisdom  in  their  creation  against 
Moses’  complaint  sufficiently  powerfully  to  withstand  a  thousand  such  objections, 
also  pursue  great  cleanliness.  These  insects  continually  wash  their  faces,  eyes,  and 
wings  as  though  taking  ablutions,  and  have  important  duties.  The  common  view  is 
short-sighted; it is still unable to comprehend those duties. 

Indeed,  Almighty  God  has  created  an  orderly  group  of  carniverous  beings  as 
public health officials of a sort; they cleanse the seas by gathering up the corpses of 
other sea-creatures2 that die every day in their millions,  

                                                 

2 One fish produces thousands of eggs and thousands of young. So to maintain the balance, from a 
roe consisting of a million eggs the young fish that hatch and survive will equal the fish that die. Also, 
the mother fish cannot always superintend her young because of the great difference in size between 
them, and she cannot enter the     places they hide. So as a manifestation of divine compassion, the All-
Wise and Compassionate promotes one of the young to supervise the others, and employs the tiny 
creature in the mother’s duties. 

 

339

and prevent the sea from becoming polluted and disgusting with their corpses. If those 
public  health  officals  of  the  sea did not  carry out  their extremely  regular duties, the 
sea  would  not  sparkle  like  a  mirror;  it  would  rather  display  a  sad  and  touching 
turbidity. 

Also,  Almighty  God  has  created  carniverous  and  carrion-eating  birds,  and  wild 
animals  to  be  like  cleansing  and public  health  officials  which  collect  the corpses  of 
the wild animals and birds that die every day in their millions, cleanse the face of the 
earth  of  those  putrid  remains,  and  save  other  animate  beings  from  such  sad, 
discomforting  sights.  Some,  like  eagles  for  example,  through  a  divine  impulse, 
wonderfully  perceive  the  location  of  a  corpse  from  a  distance  of  five  or  six  hours, 
though hidden and distant, and hasten to remove it. If those health officals of the land 
were not extremely efficient and orderly in carrying out their official duties, the face 
of the earth would become such so as to make all weep. 

The  licit  food of  carniverous animals  is  the  flesh  of dead  animals.  The  flesh  of 
living  animals  is  unlawful  for  them.  If  they  eat  it,  they  receive  punishment.  The 
Hadith which states: “Retaliation shall be made for the hornless sheep on the horned 
on Resurrection Day”3 points out that although the bodies of animals with  immortal 
spirits  perish,  they  will  receive  reward  and  punishment  in  a  manner  appropriate  for 
them in an eternal realm. In consequence, it may be said that the flesh of live animals 
is unlawful for wild animals. 

Furthermore,  ants  are  employed  as  cleansing  officials  to  collect  the  corpses  of 
tiny creatures and small particles and fragments of bounty. They  are given duties as 
public  health  officals  to  preserve  tiny  particles  of  divine  bounty  from  waste,  from 
being trodden underfoot, contempt and futility, and to gather up the corpses of other 
small creatures. 

Similarly,  flies  are  charged  with  duties  of  cleaning  away  poisonous  substances 
and  microbes  which  breed  disease  and  are  invisible  to  the  human  eye.  They  do  not 
transmit  microbes,  on  the  contrary,  through  sucking  up  and  imbibing  harmful 
microbes they destroy them and cause them to be transformed into a different state; 
they prevent the spread of many contagious diseases. A sign that they are both health 
workers and cleansing officials and chemists and that they exhibit extensive wisdom 
is the fact that  

                                                 

3 Musnad, ii, 235. 

 

340

they are extremely numerous. For valuable and beneficial things are multiplied.4 

O  you  self-centred  human  being!  Apart  from  the  thousands  of  instances  of 
wisdom in the creation of flies, consider the following small benefit that concerns you 
and leave off your hostility towards them. For just as they offer you some familiarity 
in  your  exile,  solitude  and  loneliness,  so  do  they  warn  you  against  sliding  into 
heedlessness  and  your  thought  wandering.  You  see  flies  that  through  their  delicate 
manner and their washing their faces and eyes as though taking ablutions are giving 
you a lesson and reminding you of human duties like action and cleanliness. 

Moreover, bees, which may be thought of as a sort of fly, give you honey to eat, 
the  sweetest  and  most  delicate  of  bounties.  And  as  is  stated  by  the  Qur’an  of 
Miraculous  Exposition,  they  are  distinguished  by  receiving  divine  inspiration. So  to 
be hostile towards them although they should be loved; indeed, to be hostile towards 
creatures that suffer all sorts of difficulties in hastening in friendship to assist man, is 
wrongful and unjust. We may combat harmful creatures only to repel their harm. We 
fight wolves to protect sheep from their attack, for example. 

Mosquitoes and fleas fall upon the turbid blood flowing in the veins polluted by 
harmful substances, indeed they are charged with consuming the polluted blood. So in 
hot weather when there is blood surplus to the body’s needs, why should they not be 
natural cuppers? It is possible... 

Glory be to Him whose art bewilders the mind! 
At  one  time  when  I  was  struggling  with  my  evil-commanding  soul,  it  was 
imagining  that  the  bounties  it  saw  in  itself  to  be  its  own  property,  and  it  became 
conceited, proud and boastful. I told it: “This property is not yours; it is on trust.” So 
it gave up its conceit and pride but became lazy, it said: “Why should I bother about 
someone who is not mine? Let him perish, what is it to me?” Suddenly I saw that a fly 
had alighted on my hand and had started to thoroughly clean its eyes, face, and wings, 
which were its trust from God. The fly was washing itself just like a soldier cleans his 
rifle and uniform thoroughly, which belong to the state. I said to my soul: “You look 
at that!” It looked and learned a good lesson. As for the fly, it became my conceited 
and lazy soul’s teacher and instructor. 

Fly excretion is not harmful medically; in fact, sometimes it is a sweet  

                                                 

4 How beautifully and subtly the following lines by the celebrated Yunus Emre allude to the 
wonderful works of dominical art that are the fly’s wings and body: “I loaded a single fly’s wing onto 
forty ox carts; Forty of them could not haul it; it remainded thus decreed.” 

 

341

syrup.  For  it  is  not  distant  from  dominical  wisdom,  it  is  indeed  a  function  of  that 
wisdom,  that  while  flies  contain  thousands  of  harmful  substances,  microbes,  and 
poisons from what they have eaten, they are like tiny transformation and purification 
machines. Apart from bees, there are other species of flying insects5 that eat various 
putrid substances and then continuously excrete droplets of syrup in place of the filth. 
By transforming those rotten, poisonous substances into a sweet and healing syrup, a 
confection of divine power, that rains onto the leaves of trees, they prove that they are 
machines for transmuting one substance into another. They demonstrate before one’s 
eyes what a mighty nation and group these tiny individuals form. Through the tongues 
of  their  beings they  say:  “Don’t  look  at  our  smallness,  consider  the  vastness  of  our 
species, and declare, ‘All Glory be to God!’” 
 

                                                 

5 At the end of spring there is one species of small fly which is created in the form of a black 
mass that becomes stuck to the branches of almond and wild apricot trees, and remains there. In place 
of waste matter, droplets continuously flow from the flies. These drops are like honey and other species 
of flies gather round them suck them up. 

Another species is employed in the pollination of the flowers of plants and some trees, like the 

fig. Just as the fire-fly is worthy of observation, since it is a sort of fly that flashes, sparkles, and is 
luminous; so do other species that are gilded and glisten like gold deserve notice. Also, we must not 
forget flies armed with lances, and wild bees, which are like brigands. If the All-Merciful Creator had 
not pulled in their reins, if they attacked human beings like fleas, in the same way that those armed 
species killed Nimrod, they would have assailed the human race and expounded the implicit meaning 
of the verse, “And if the fly should snatch away anything from them.” Thus, the hundred famous 
species of flies like these bearing special qualities are of great importance so that this mighty verse 
makes them its subject: 

O men! Here is a parable set forth; listen to it! Those on whom you call besides God cannot 
create [even] a fly, if they all met together for the purpose! And if the fly should snatch away 
anything from them, they would have no power to release it from the fly. Feeble are those who 
petition and those whom they petition! 
 

 

342

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Verily, when He intends a thing, His command is “Be!” and it is.(36:82) 

As this  verse  indicates, creation is through a command. The treasuries of divine 
power  are  in  the  Kaf.  and  Nun.1  Several  of  the  many aspects  of  this  subtle mystery 
have  been  mentioned  in  various  places  of  the  Risale-i  Nur.  Here,  in  order  to  make 
more  comprehensible 
the 
characteristics, qualities, and material effects of the Qur’an’s letters, and particularly 
the disjointed letters at the start of some Suras, we shall illustrate this mystery with a 
material example. 

this  century’s  materialist  view  Hadiths  about 

in 

The  All-Glorious  One,  the  Owner  of  the  sublime  throne,  has  four  thrones  by 
which He directs the creatures on the earth, which is like a centre of the world and a 
heart and qibla of the universe: 

One  is  the  throne  of  preservation  and  life,  which  is  earth.  This  is  the 

manifestation of the divine names of Preserver and Giver of Life. 

The Second Throne is the throne of bounty and mercy, which is the element of 

water. 

The Third is the throne of knowledge and wisdom, which is the element of light. 
The Fourth is the throne of will and command, which is the element of air. 
We  see  with  our  eyes  that  the  minerals  and  innumerable  various  plants  are 
formed from simple earth, through which are met the  innumerable needs of animals 
and human beings – boundless multiplicity from unity with perfect order, an infinite 
variety of species from a simple element, innumerable regular embroideries on a plain 
page.  And  although  water,  and  especially  the  sperm  of  animals,  is  a  simple  fluid, 
innumerable  miracles  of  art  become  manifest  through  it  in  the  many  animate 
creatures. This shows that similarly to these two thrones, light and air are the places of 
manifestation of the wondrous miracles of the pen of knowledge, command, and will 
of  the  Pre-Eternal  Inscriber,  the  All-Knowing  One  of  Glory,  despite  their  simple 
nature. 

For  now  we  shall  leave  aside  the  element  of  light,  and  in  connection  with  our 
question  here,  try  to  unveil  a  little  the  marvels  of  command  and  will  within  the 
element of air, which for the globe of the earth is the throne of the divine command 
and will. 

With the air in our mouths we sow letters and words which at once  

                                                 

1 The two letters of the Arabic alphabet in the word “Kun!”, that is, “Be!” (Tr.) 

 

343

sprout  and  send  forth  shoots.  That  is  to  say,  in  a  instant,  in  no  time  at  all,  a  word 
becomes a seed in the air, sprouting in the surrounding air and producing the shoots of 
innumerable instances  of  the  same  word,  great  and  small,  in  the  air  all  around.  We 
consider  the  element  of  air  and  we  see  that  it  is  so  obedient  and  subjugated  to  the 
command of “‘Be!’ and it is” that it is as if like a soldier in a regular army, each of its 
particles is as though ever awaiting its orders, demonstrating its compliance with and 
submission  to  commands  manifested  from  the  command  of  “Be!”,  arriving 
instantaneously from another particle far off. 

For  example,  the  fact  that  human  speech  may  be  heard  anywhere  in  the  air  by 
means  of  radio  transmitters  and  receivers  –  on  condition  there  is  a  receiver  – 
everywhere  on  earth,  at  the  same  moment,  instantaneously,  demonstrates  how 
perfectly  each  particle  of  air  obediently  conforms  to  the  manifestation  of  the 
command  of  “‘Be!’  and  it  is.”  In  respect  of  sacredness  and  in  accordance  with  the 
mystery of compliance, the  letters, which  have  an unstable existence  in the air, may 
manifest many external effects and material qualities. 

Innumerable signs like these show that letters, which are the beings of the air, and 
especially  sacred  and  Qur’anic  letters,  and  in  particular  the  letters  of  the  divine 
cyphers  at  the  beginning  of  some  Suras,  are orderly  and  infinitely  sensitive,  and  as 
though  listening  to  the  instantaneous  commands  and  acting  accordingly  They 
therefore  surely  make  the  particles  of  air  submit  to  their  material  qualities  and 
wondrous properties, which reflect the manifestation of the command of “‘Be!’ and it 
is” and of pre-eternal will. 

In consequence of this mystery, sometimes the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition 
describes the works of divine power as though they proceed from the attributes of will 
and speech, meaning that they  govern  like power apart from utter speed of creation, 
submission of things and subjugation of beings. That is to say, the letters proceeding 
from  the  creative  command  govern  in the  existence of  beings  like  a  physical  force, 
and the creative command is manifested identically with power and will. 

Yes,  the  works  of  will  and  the  creative  command  appear  to  be  identical  with 
power in beings of this sort whose physical existence is invisible, like the air, which is 
semi-material  and  semi-immaterial;  indeed,  they  are  identical  with  power.  It  is  as 
though  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  decrees,  “Verily,  when  He  intends  a 
thing, His command is ‘Be!’ and it is” in order to attract attention to beings which are 
an isthmus between the material and the immaterial. 

It is thus in keeping with the sacred letters of the divine cyphers like Ha.  

 

344

Mim.  Ta.  Sin.,  and  Alif.  Lam.  Mim.  that  they  should  each  be  switches  among  the 
particles of the air for causing the wires of the hidden, subtle relations to vibrate and 
so be  the  means of  the  immaterial  sacred  wireless and  telecommunications  between 
the earth and divine throne; it is entirely reasonable that this should be their function. 

In addition to the duties of all particles of the air dispersed throughout the world, 
their  conforming  to  the  commands  in  connection  with  such  things  as  wirelesses, 
radios,  telephones,  and  telegraphs,  and  acting  as  receivers  and  conductors  of  subtle 
forces  such  as  electricity  –  I  conjectured  and  observed  even  a  further  duty  in  the 
blossom of my almond-tree. The state the tree acquired through the touch of the air in 
the  blowing  breeze  –  with  its  particles  like  receivers  conforming  to  the  same 
command  at  the  same  instant  –  and  all  the  trees  on  the  face  of  the  earth  like  a 
disciplined army, afforded me a conviction as certain as two plus two equals four. 

That is to say, the air is a swift and agile servant on the face of the earth, tending 
the  guests  of  the  Most  Merciful  and  Compassionate  One.  Resembling  radio  and 
telephone  receivers  and  soldiers  under  orders,  all  its  particles  deliver  the  sacred 
commands of that Most Merciful One to the plants and animals. At the command of 
“‘Be!’  and  it  is,”  they  carry  out  numerous  orderly  duties  such  as  acting  as  fans  for 
those creatures, aiding their respiration; that is, after performing the duty of purifying 
their  blood,  the  water  of  life,  and  kindling  their  bodily  heat,  the  fire  of  life,  they 
emerge from them and are the means of forming words in their mouths. 

As  a result  of  this  quality of  the  air,  when  letters,  the  beings  of  the  air,  acquire 
sacredness; that is, when they take up the position of being receivers; that is, they take 
up  the position  of receivers  because  they  are  letters  of  the  Qur’an,  and become  like 
switches,  and  even  more  so  when  the  letters  at  the  start  of  some  Suras  become  the 
sensitive central switches of those hidden relations, just as their existences in the air 
possess  this  quality,  so  their  existences  in  the  mind  and  even  as  inscriptions  have  a 
share in it. That  is to say,  like physical medicines, healing cures and other purposes 
may be achieved by reading and writing those letters. 

                                                                                            S a i d   N u r s i 
 
 

 

345

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Say:  “If  the  ocean  were  ink  [wherewith  to  write  out]  the  words  of  my 
Sustainer, sooner would the ocean be exhausted than would the words of my 
Sustainer, even if we added another ocean like it, for its aid.(18:109) 

[This mighty  verse  is  a  vast, elevated ocean. A  large  volume 
in  order  to  describe  all  its  jewels.  So  postponing  those 
precious jewels to another time, for now I shall explain a few 
rays  of  a  subtle  point  in  order  to  recall  those  truths.  They 
appeared  faintly  to  me  a  few  days  ago  during  the  tesbihat, 
recited following the five daily prayers, which is an important 
time  for  me,  and  struck  my  attention.  I  did  not  write  them 
down  at  the  time  and  they  gradually  grew  fainter.  So before 
they are lost altogether so as to hunt down a manifestation of 
those  points,  I  shall  say  a  few  words  as  though  encircling 
them.] 

F i r s t  W o r d : In respect of being a divine attribute like knowledge and power, 
pre-eternal  speech  is  infinite.  Certainly,  if  the  seas  were  ink  for  something  infinite, 
they would never get to the end of them. 

S e c o n d  W o r d : Speech is the clearest and most powerful thing that makes 
known  someone’s  existence.  Hearing  someone’s  speech  proves  that  he  exists  as 
clearly  as  a  thousand  proofs,  indeed,  as  clearly  as  seeing  him.  Thus  through  its 
allusive meaning, this verse says: 

“If the seas were ink to the extent of divine speech, which demonstrates the All-
Glorious  Sustainer’s  existence,  and  the  trees  were  pens,  and  they  were  to  write  His 
speech, they would never come to the end of them. That is to say, just as any speech 
points  to  its  own  extent  and  at  the  degree  of  witnessing  to  the  existence  of  the  one 
who spoke it, so the extent that the above speech points to and tells of the One who 
spoke it – the Single and Eternally Besought One – is beyond measure, so that if all 
the seas were ink they would still be insufficient for writing it.” 

T h i r d  W o r d : When teaching the truths of belief to all classes of men, the 
Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  apparently  repeats  the  same  truth,  which  is  in 
accordance  with  the  wisdom  of  establishing,  verifying,  and  convincing  them  of  a 
truth.  This  verse  is  in  effect  an  answer  to  the  entirely  unjustifiable  attacks  of  the 
Jewish  scholars,  who  were  the  learned  People  of  the  Book  of  the  time,  on  the 
Illustrious  Prophet  (UWBP)  concerning  this,  because  he  was  unlettered  and  not 
learned. It is as follows: 

The verse says: “The repetition of a truth containing numerous benefits  

 

346

and results in different and miraculous ways for numerous instances of wisdom, such 
as  verification  and  persuasion,  does  not  arise  from  restricted  speech  or  intellectual 
deficiency or lack of capital. Nor does the repetition of such matters as the pillars of 
belief comprising thousands of truths each of which is infinitely valuable, in order to 
establish  them  in  the  hearts  of  the  mass  of  people  in  particular.    For  the  Qur’an 
proceeds  from  the  endless,  infinite  pre-eternal  treasury  of  divine  speech,  and  being 
turned  to  the  Manifest  World  on  account  of  the  World  of  the  Unseen,  speaks  with 
man and the jinn, spirits, and the angels, resounding in the ears of each person. If the 
seas  were  ink,  sentient  beings  scribes,  plants  pens,  and  particles  the  pens’  nibs  for 
counting  the  words of  pre-eternal  speech,  the  source  of  the  Qur’an,  they  would  still 
never come to the end of them. For they are finite, while divine speech is infinite.” 

F  o  u  r  t  h    W  o  r  d  :  It  is  clear  that  the  issuing  of  speech  from  something 
unexpected increases the speech’s effectiveness and makes it heeded. The speech-like 
voices of large bodies like the clouds and the atmosphere in particular make everyone 
listen  to  them.  The  sounds  of  a  gramophone  the  size  of  a  mountain  would  attract 
attention even more. The heavenly voice of the Qur’an, which takes the levels of the 
heavens  as  gramophone  records,  issues  forth  to  make  the  head  of  the  globe  of  the 
earth listen to it. And with the power of the radio, the molecules of air become like the 
receivers  and  transmitters  of  its  letters.  The  verse  alludes  to  the  fact  that  the  air 
molecules  each  become  mirrors,  tongues,  needle  points,  and  ears  for  the  All-Wise 
Qur’an’s  letters, and  indicates  how important, valuable, significant, and  living those 
letters are, saying: “The Qur’an, which is divine speech, is so living and valuable that 
if all the seas were to become ink, and the angels scribes, and minute particles points, 
and plants and hairs pens to the number of the ears that listen to it and hear it, and to 
the  number of the sacred words that enter those  ears, they  could still  never come to 
the end of them.” 

No,  they  could  never  come  to  the  end  of  them,  because  if  Almighty  God 
multiplies man’s weak, lifeless speech millions of times in the air, for sure each word 
of the speech of that Peerless Sovereign of the heavens and earth, which looks to all 
the  earth  and  the  heavens  and  addresses  all  the  conscious  beings  within  them,  will 
comprise words to the numbers of particles of air. 
F i f t h  W o r d : This consists of two letters. 
The First Letter: Just as the divine attribute of speech has words, so does power 
have  embodied  words,  and  knowledge  too  has  wise  words  of  divine  determining; 
these consist of all beings. Living beings, and small  

 

347

creatures  in  particular,  are  each  dominical  words  which  point  to  the  Pre-Eternal 
Speaker in a way more powerfully than speech. If the seas were ink they could never 
come  to  the  end  of  them.  That  is,  the  verse  looks  to  this  meaning  too  in  allusive 
fashion. 

The Second Letter: All the inspiration received by angels and men, and even by 
animals, are divine speech of a sort. Its words are certainly infinite. It means that the 
verse is telling us how numerous and infinite are the inspirations and words of divine 
command which the innumerable cohorts of absolute sovereignty continually receive. 

The knowledge is with God alone. * None knows the Unseen save God. 
 

 

348

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
And  We  sent  down  iron,  in  which  is  [material  for]  mighty  war, as  well  as 
many benefits for mankind.(57:25) 

[A brief reply to a question about the above verse, which has 
come to have great importance, for with it a prominent person 
with  knowledge  of  modern  science  silenced  a  number  of 
hojas.] 

Q u e s t i o n : It is normally said that iron is mined from the earth, so why is it 
said  in  this  verse  “We  sent  down”  or  “revealed”  rather  than  We  excavated  or 
extracted; this appears to be inappropriate?  

T h e  A n s w e r : With the phrase “We sent down,” the Qur’an of Miraculous 
Exposition recalls the vast and important bounty of iron. For it does not consider iron 
only for itself so that it should say extracted, but recalls the tremendous divine bounty 
in iron and how needy mankind is for it. Its aspect of being a bounty does not come 
upwards from below, but down from the treasury of mercy. The treasury of mercy is 
certainly elevated, above, and at a high level, so the bounty descends from above; and 
needy mankind’s level is surely below. The bestowal of bounty is superior to need, so 
the correct way to express the fact that bounty comes from the treasury of mercy to 
meet mankind’s need is “We sent down;” it is not We extracted. 

Also, since the gradual extraction of iron is at man’s hand, the word extract does 
not  alert  the  heedless  person  to  its  aspects  of  bounty.  If  what  is  meant  is  iron’s 
material substance, it is extracted in respect of its physical situation. But iron’s quality 
of being a bounty, which  is the  intended meaning here, is immaterial. This meaning 
looks not to physical situation, but to immaterial degree or level. Bounties proceeding 
from the treasury of mercy, which is a manifestation of the infinitely exalted degree of 
the Most Merciful, are certainly sent down from the highest level to the lowest. Thus, 
the correct expression is “We sent down:” it recalls to mankind that iron is one of the 
greatest divine bounties. 

Yes,  iron  is  the  source of  all  mankind’s  industries,  and  of  its  advancement  and 
progress,  and  the  means  of  its  power  and  strength.  So  in  order  to  call  to  mind  this 
tremendous bounty and bestowal of favour, in lofty style the Qur’an states: 

And  We  sent  down  iron,  in  which  is  [material  for]  mighty  war, as  well  as 
many benefits for mankind. 

In a similar way it declares about David’s important miracle: 

 

349

And We made the iron soft for him.(34:10) 

That is to say, it points out the softening of iron, a great miracle and great bounty 

for a great prophet. 

Secondly: Above and below are relative. They are above and below in relation to 
the earth’s  centre. In  fact, something which  is below in relation to us is above from 
the point of  view of the American  continent. This means the situation of substances 
coming  from  the  earth’s  centre  to  its  surface  changes  according  to  the  position  of 
people on the surface. 

With  the tongue  of  miraculousness,  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  states 
that  iron  contains  so  many  benefits  and  has  such  extensive  uses  that  it  is  not  some 
common substance to be extracted from the store of the globe, and that it is not some 
natural  substance to be used  for  any  chance  need.  Rather,  in  order  to  express  iron’s 
general uses it states that it is a bounty stored up by the Creator of the Universe in the 
treasury  of  mercy  and  huge  workshop of  the  universe  which  He  sent  down  through 
His  majestic  title  of  Sustainer  of  the  Heavens  and  Earth  to  meet  the  needs  of  the 
earth’s inhabitants. It is as if, like rain, heat, and light, which descend from the skies, 
it contains such all-embracing advantages that  it  was sent from the  workshop of the 
universe, not from the narrow store of the earth. It was sent having been prepared in 
the great treasury of mercy in the palace of the universe, and situated in the store of 
the globe, from which it is extracted little by little over the centuries in proportion to 
need. 

The  Qur’an  of  Mighty  Stature  does  not  want  to  express  the  iron  which  is 
extracted bit by bit from this small store only as being utilized, but as being sent down 
together  with  the  globe  of  the  earth  from  the  supreme  treasury,  as  a  tremendous 
bounty. That is to say, the thing most necessary for the house of the earth is iron, for 
when the All-Glorious Creator separated the earth from the sun and sent it down for 
mankind, He sent down iron together with it, and met most of mankind’s needs with 
it. The All-Wise Qur’an decrees in miraculous fashion: “Use this iron in  your works 
and try to excavate it and take advantage of it.” 

The  verse  describes  two  bounties;  both  the  repulsion  of  enemies  and  the 
attraction of benefits. Iron was put to important human uses before the revelation of 
the Qur’an, but with the phrase, “in which is [material for] mighty war” it points out 
that  in the  future, it would be used for travelling  through the sea, air, and  land, and 
would  subjugate  the  globe  wondrously  and  astonishingly,  and  demonstrate  a 
wondrous  death-tainted  strength.  Thus  of  its  various  sorts  of  miraculousness,  it 
displays a flash of miraculousness in its predicting the future.  

 

350

While discussing the above point, the subject of Solomon’s Hoopoe came up. A 
persistent  questioner  from  among  our  brothers1  asked:  “What  is  the  reason  for  the 
Hoopoe  describing  Almighty  God  with  a  relatively  insignificant  attribute  in  the 
sentence, “Who brings to  light what  is  hidden  in  the heavens and the earth,”(27:25) 
while there are more significant divine attributes? 

T h e  A n s w e r : One aspect of eloquence is to make understood the occupation 
or  craft  with  which  the  speaker  is  mostly  employed.  Like  the  nomad  diviners  who 
intuitively  discover  the  places  where  water  is to be  found  in  the  Arabian  Peninsula, 
Solomon’s Hoopoe, a diviner from among birds and animals, was a blessed bird who 
was  employed  in  various  duties and  also  found water  for Solomon  (Upon  whom be 
peace),  so  it  could  be  used.  It  is  stating  through  the  measure  of  its  own  art  that 
Almighty God proves His fitness to be worshipped and prostrated before by making 
known the things hidden in the heavens and earth. 

Yes, the Hoopoe understood it well, for the natural inclination of the incalculable 
numbers of seeds and minerals under the earth is not to emerge upwards from below. 
Because  since  such  beings  lack  life  and  will,  they  cannot  go  upwards  of  their  own 
accord; on their own, they can only tumble downwards. A body concealed under the 
heaviness of the earth certainly could not shake that heavy load off its shoulders on its 
own and emerge upwards. It means that it does so through a wondrous power. 

The  Hoopoe understood through  his divining this most hidden and important of 
the proofs of divine fitness to be worshipped, so that the All-Wise Qur’an imparted a 
miraculousness to its statement concerning it. 

 

 

                                                 

1 This refers to Re’fet, who is diligent in asking questions but lazy when it comes to writing! 

 

351

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
And He sent down for you eight head of cattle in pairs: He makes you in the 
wombs of your mothers, in stages, one after the other.(39:6) 

This verse comprises the same point we explained in the discussion of the verse, 

“And We sent down iron;”(57:25) it both corroborates it and is corroborated by it. 

By saying  in Sura al-Zumar, “And He sent down for  you eight head of cattle in 
pairs,”  and  not  saying:  And  He  created  for  you  eight  head  of  cattle  in  pairs,  the 
Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition is stating: “Eight sorts of blessed animals have been 
sent  down  to  you  from  the  treasury  of  mercy,  as  though  they  were  bounties  of 
Paradise.” Yes, those blessed animals are a  gift  for mankind with  all their parts, for 
their wool or hair is made into the mobile homes and clothes of nomads, good food is 
made from their flesh, delicious sustenance is had from their milk, shoes and so on are 
made  from  their  hides,  cultivated  land  is  nourished  by  their  manure  and  men  make 
fuel  from  it.  It  is  as  though  those  blessed  animals  are  pure  bounty  and  embodied 
mercy. 

It is because of this that like rain is called “mercy” (rahma), these blessed beasts 
are called “bounty” (an‘am). As though just as embodied mercy becomes rain, so too 
embodied bounty takes on the form of goats, sheep, cattle, water-buffalo, and camels. 
For sure their physical bodies are created on the earth, but since the attribute of being 
bounties  and  the  meaning  of  mercy  have  totally  predominated  over  their  physical 
beings,  in accordance  with the  phrase  “And  He  sent  down,”  the  All-Compassionate 
Creator  sent  down  these  blessed  animals  directly  from  the  exalted  degree  of  His 
mercy and His elevated, immaterial Paradise, as gifts from the treasury of mercy. 

Sometimes art of high worth  is present  in material worth  virtually  nothing. It  is 
given  value  in  respect  of  the  art,  not  of  the  material’s  value,  like  the  tiny  material 
being  of  a  fly  and  the  sublime  dominical  art within  it.  Sometimes  valuable  material 
worth five lira contains art worth nothing; then the material predominates. 

In just the same way, sometimes in some physical material the meaning of bounty 
and mercy is found to such a degree that it is a hundred times more important than the 
material.  The  physical  matter  is  quite  simply  hidden  and  its  aspect  of  bounty 
predominates. Thus, just as the  vast benefits of iron and the many products it  yields 
conceal  its  material  aspect,  so  too  bounty  being  present  in  every  member  of  the 
blessed animals mentioned  

 

352

above has transformed their physical matter into bounty. It is because of this that their 
immaterial attributes have been considered, and their physical beings disregarded, and 
this is expressed with the phrases, “And He sent down,” and, “And We sent down.” 

These two phrases state the above-mentioned point both in regard to reality, and 
they  miraculously  express  an  important  meaning  in  respect  of  eloquence.  It  is  as 
follows: 

Together  with  its  extremely  tough  nature,  and  its  being  hidden,  frequently  deep 
underground,  iron  is  found  everywhere,  bestowed  with  the  quality  of  being  easily 
softened. Everyone can therefore obtain it easily everywhere for everything. In order 
to express this, it states through the phrase “And We sent down iron,” that iron tools 
are  obtained  so  easily  they  are  as  though  sent  down  from  a  workbench  above  as 
natural, heavenly bounties, and placed in man’s hand. 

Furthermore,  although  some  animal  species,  from  the  mosquito  to  snakes, 
scorpions, wolves, and lions are harmful to human beings, large beasts like the water-
buffalo, ox, and camel, who are important among animals, are extremely docile  and 
submissive. So much so they may be led by even a child. To express the idea of their 
submissiveness,  the  verse  “And  He  sent  down  for  you  eight  head of  cattle  in  pairs” 
states  that  being  neither  wild  nor  dangerous,  these  blessed  beasts  do  not  resemble 
worldly animals. They are rather useful and harmless like paradisaical animals. They 
have been sent down from above, that is, from the treasury of mercy. 

Perhaps  this  is  why  some  Qur’anic  commentators  have  said  that  these  animals 
have been sent down from Paradise. It is hardly prolix to write a whole page about a 
single letter of the All-Wise Qur’an,1 for it is God’s Word. It has therefore not been 
wasteful  to  write  two  or  three  pages  on  the  expression  “And  We  sent  down.” 
Sometimes one letter of the Qur’an is the key to a treasury. 

 

                                                 

1 What some Qur’anic commentators intended by saying “Their origins were the heavens” was 

this: the continued existence of the animals known as “an‘am” is through sustenance, and their 
sustenance is fodder. The fodder’s sustenance is rain. Rain is the water of life and mercy; so sustenance 
also comes from the heavens. The verse, “And in the heavens is our sustenance”(51:22) alludes to this. 
Since those animals’ continually renewed existences lie in the rain which comes from the skies, the 
expression “And He sent down” is apt, for it expresses the meaning of having been sent down from the 
sky. 

 

353

Pieces Written in Eskişehir Prison 
as a True Solace for the Risale-i Nur Students 

 
My Dear Brothers! 
I was exceedingly unhappy for you; I was crushed by grief. But it was imparted 
to  me  that  divine  determining  and  your  fate  have  given  you  this  prison’s  water  to 
drink  and  bread  to  eat,  all  together.  I  saw  that  as  a  mark  of  divine  mercy  and 
manifestation  of  dominical  favour,  your  eating  this  bread  together  and  drinking  this 
water  was  the  easiest,  lightest,  best,  and  most  meritorious  of  ways;  that  this  prison 
was  a most beneficial  place  of  instruction  for  the  Risale-i  Nur  students, and  a  most 
effulgent  place  of  ordeal;  that  it  was  a  most  exacting  place of  examination  teaching 
just  how  essential  it  is  to  act prudently  in  the  face  of one’s  enemies.  I  saw  it  in  the 
form  of  a  luminous  place  of  study  and  tekke  for  learning  and  benefiting  from  the 
elevated qualities and fine characteristics of our friends here, which are all different, 
and to establish  and renew the brotherhood between them. I did not complain about 
this situation therefore, but offered thanks with all my spirit. Yes, our way is thanks. 
And it is to see an aspect of mercy, an aspect of bounty, in everything. 
From your brother who is grieved at the pains of all of you, 
                                                                        S a i d   N u r s i 

*   *   * 

A Rule 

Risale-i Nur students should not seek light outside the circle of the Risale-i Nur, 
and they cannot seek it. If they do so, they will find a lamp in place of the immaterial 
sun giving light through the window of the Risale-i Nur, and perhaps lose the sun. 

Also, the pure and powerful way of friendship and brotherhood within the circle 
of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  which  gains  numerous  spirits  for  each  person  and  through  the 
mystery of the  legacy of prophethood depicts the Companions’ way of brotherhood, 
leaves no need for seeking a spiritual guide or father outside that sphere, in a way that 
is harmful to them in three respects; it provides many a€abeys that is, elder brothers, 
in place of a single  father. The joint compassion of elder brothers reduces a father’s 
compassion to nothing. 

 

354

Someone who has a shaykh before entering the Risale-i Nur circle may keep him 
after entering it. But the person who does not, may only seek a guide within the circle. 
Moreover, the knowledge of reality taught within the circle of the Risale-i Nur, which 
offers the  effulgence  of  the  legacy  of  prophethood,  the  greater  sainthood,  leaves  no 
need for the Sufi orders outside that circle – unless of course they are self-indulgent 
people  who  misunderstand  the  way  of  Sufism,  are  addicted  to  pleasant  dreams  and 
imaginings, lights and spiritual pleasures, and desire worldly, fanciful pleasures which 
are  different  to  the  virtues  of  the  hereafter,  and  want  a  rank  where  people  have 
recourse to them. 

This world is the abode of labour and service; recompense is commensurate with 
hardship  and  difficulty;  it  is  not  a  place  of  reward.  The  people  of  reality  attach  no 
importance,  therefore,  to  the  pleasures  and  lights  of  illuminations  and  wonder-
working. Indeed, they sometimes flee them and want to conceal them. 

Furthermore,  the  Risale-i  Nur’s  circle  is  very  broad,  and  its  students,  very 
numerous. It does not seek  anyone who depart from it. It gives them  no importance 
and  perhaps  will  not  again  admit  them.  Everyone  has  only  one  heart,  and  a  single 
heart cannot be both within the circle and outside it. 

Also,  those  desirous  for  guidance  outside  should  not  busy  themselves  with  the 
Risale-i Nur students. For they may receive harm in three respects. Those people who 
are  within  the  bounds  of  fear  of  God do  not  need  guidance,  but outside  it  there  are 
abundant people who do not perform the five daily prayers. To leave aside the latter 
and busy oneself with the former is not guidance. If such a person loves the students, 
let  him  firstly  enter  the  circle  and  be  not  a  father,  but  a  brother,  and  if  he  is  very 
virtuous, an elder brother. 

It has also become apparent from this incident that attachment to the Risale-i Nur 
holds much importance and has a  high price. If he is sensible, the person who gives 
this price and takes up a position striving against irreligion in the name of the Islamic 
world,  will  not  abandon  this  way  which  is  as  valuable  as  diamonds,  and  embrace 
other ways. 

                                                                                     S a i d  
 

 

355

A Short Piece Written in Eskişehir Prison 

My Brothers! 
On numerous occasions I have defended the Risale-i Nur students in the manner 
of which they are worthy. God willing, I shall shout it out in court. I shall make the 
world hear both of the Risale-i Nur, and of its students’ value. However, I remind you 
of  the  following:  the  condition  of  my  retaining  this  mention  of  your  value  in  my 
defence  is  your  not  feeling  offended  at  the  Risale-i  Nur  due  to  your  painful 
experiences  in this affair, nor at  your Master, nor to feel disgust at  your brothers on 
the pretext of the difficulties you suffer, nor to find fault with or accuse one another. 
You will recall that in the treatise on divine determining we have proved that there are 
two aspects to the wrongs that are visited on us: one is man’s aspect, the other, divine 
determining’s. In the same event, man does wrong, but divine determining is fair and 
acts  in  justice.  In  this  matter  of  ours,  we  should  think more  of  the  justice  of  divine 
determining and mystery of divine wisdom than man’s tyranny and wrongdoing. 

Yes,  divine  determining  summoned  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  to  this  gathering. 
And the wisdom in this was the unfolding of their striving and struggle, which drove 
them to this truly very distressing School of Joseph. Man’s tyranny and pretexts were 
the means. So beware, do not say to one another: “If I had not done such-and-such I 
would not have been arrested.” 

                                                                           S a i d   N u r s i 

*   *   * 

Part of My Defence Speech, 
which was included here and not later removed 

I seek an important right from the Chief and Members of the Court, as follows: 
In this matter it is not only my person which is under scrutiny so that with  your 
exonerating  me  and  becoming  aware  of  the  reality  of  the  case,  the  case  would  be 
solved. For the collective personality of the pious and the people of learning has been 
incriminated in the eyes of the nation, and a lack of confidence has been engendered 
in  the  government  towards  the  pious  and  religious  scholars,  and  they  need  to know 
how they will avoid dangerous and harmful attempts against them. I therefore request 
that this  

 

356

last part of my defence be printed in the  new  letters and distributed. Then the pious 
and  the scholars  will  not be deceived by  the  intrigues,  or  embark  on any  dangerous 
and  damaging  enterprises.  Their  collective  personality  will  be  saved  from  being 
suspect  in  the  eyes  of  the  nation.  The  government  too  will  have  confidence  in  the 
this  misunderstanding.  Incidents  and 
to 
scholars  and  an  end  will  be  put 
misunderstandings like this, which are extremely harmful for the government and the 
nation and the country, will not then be repeated. 

                                                                                S a i d   N u r s i 

My  Brothers! 
If  everyone,  and  even  I,  withdraw  from  defending  and  preserving  the  Risale-i 
Nur, five of our brothers should not withdraw. These are Hüseyin Usta, Halil ‹brahim, 
Re’fet  Bey,  Hüsrev,  and  Hakk›  Efendi.  The  involuntary  lack  of  caution  of  the  first 
three...  because  of  the  personal  grudges of  the  open  enemies  of  the  latter  two  – the 
intention was to cause excessive harm to the Risale-i Nur. If it  had not resulted in a 
great  bounty  like  the  Risale-i  Nur  being  spread  and  made  known  to  a  significant 
degree,  these  brothers  would  have  been  greatly  upset  at  having  caused  the 
unhappiness  of  so  many  innocent  Risale-i  Nur  students.  Thus,  more  than  everyone, 
these five brothers should be cautious and united. 

                                                                               S a i d   N u r s i 

My Brothers! 
It was  imparted to my  heart that  just as the Mathnawi was the mirror to one of 
seven  truths  appearing  from  the  Sun  of  the  Qur’an,  thus  acquiring  a  sacred 
illustriousness  and  becoming  the  undying  guide  of  numerous  people  of  the  heart 
besides the Mevlevis; so too represented together in the mirror of the Risale-i Nur are 
the  seven  colours  of  the  Qur’anic  sun’s  light  and  its  various,  multicoloured 
effulgences.  God  willing,  it  will  be  an  eternal  guide  and  teacher  for  the  people  of 
reality, illustrious and sacred in seven respects, as much as seven Mathnawi’s. 

 

*  *  * 

*  *  * 

*  *  * 

My Brothers! 
Look at the protection of the  All-Glorious Preserver! As a  coincidence with the 
number  of  treatises  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  one  hundred  and  twenty  people  were 
questioned together with their confidential documents. Yet despite the intrigues of the 
foreigners  and  the  stratagems  of  the  secret  societies,  nothing  was  found  to  connect 
any Risale-i Nur student with any of the many existent associations. This was a most 
clear and brilliant instance of dominical protection and divine preservation, and was a 
favour  of  the  Most  Merciful corroborating  the  wondrous predictions  concerning  the 
Risale-i  Nur  of  Imam  ‘Ali  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him)  and  Ghawth    al-A‘zam 
(May  God  be  pleased  with  him).  The  hands  of  forty-two  of  our  innocent,  wronged 
brothers  raised  in  supplication  to  the  divine  court  halted  a  missile  directed  at  them, 
turned it back and in effect exploded it over the heads of those who had fired it. Our 
losses amount to only a few minor cuts and bruises which will gain us reward. It is a 
marvel to be saved with such minor injury from a gun that was being charged for the 
past year. One should respond with thanks and joy to such a great bounty. After this 
our  lives  will  not  be  our  own,  for  according  to  the  plans  of  the  spreaders  of 
corruption,  we  were  to  be  completely  wiped  out.  That  means  after  this  we  should 
pledge our lives not to ourselves, but to truth and reality. We should try to always see 
the trace, face, and essence of mercy in things, which will cause us not to complain, 
but to offer thanks. 

                                                                                S a i d   N u r s i  

I  request  of  my  brothers  that  they  are  not  offended  at  one  another  due  to 
discomfort,  or  distress  of  the  spirit,  or  fastidiousness,  or  being  deceived  by  Satan’s 
wiles, or at the offensive language uttered by some of them. They should not say that 
their  honour  has  been  insulted.  I  take  upon  myself  any  bad  words  that  are  spoken. 
They should not be offended. If I had a hundred honours, I would sacrifice all of them 
for love and cordiality among my brothers. 

                                                                                   S a i d   N u r s i 

357

*  *  * 

*  *  * 

 

 

 

358

My Brothers! 
I  have  understood  certainly  the  last  two  or  three  days  that  unfortunately  we 
suffered  a  blow  from  divine  mercy.  I  understood  even  that  one  of  the  many 
indications of a verse concerning the people of rebellion looks to us. It is this: 

But when they forgot the warning they had received.... on a sudden We called 
them to account.(6:44; 7:165) 

That  is,  “When  they  forgot  the  instruction  and  advice  with  which  we  have  warned 
them and did not act in accordance with it, We took hold of them and afflicted them 
with disaster.” 

Yes, recently we were prompted to write a treatise on the meaning of sincerity. In 
truth,  it  was  a  most  luminous  and  exalted  rule  of  brotherhood,  a  sacred  principle 
which allows ten men to withstand calamities and events which normally could only 
be  withstood  with  the  strength  of  tens  of  thousands.  But  unfortunately  we,  and 
foremost myself, did not act in accordance with the warning. In accordance with the 
allusive meaning of the verse, according to the science of jafr, the value of “We called 
them to account” is one thousand three  hundred and fifty-two. We were arrested on 
the  same  date.  Some  of  us  suffered  a  slap  dealt  by  divine  compassion.  Others 
suffered,  not  such  a  blow,  but  were  included  in  these  tribulations  in  order  to  be  a 
solace to our brothers who did suffer it, so that it might be a means of earning reward 
and profit. 

For  three  months  I  was  barred  from  mixing  with  others,  but  for  the  past  three 
days I have been able to learn my brothers’ states of mind. An unimaginable incident 
had  occurred  opposed  to  the  meaning  of  sincerity  involving  brothers  whom  I  had 
supposed to be the most sincere. I understood from this that an allusive meaning of 
the  verse,  “But  when  they  forgot  the  warning  they  had  received.... on  a  sudden  We 
called  them  to  account”  looked  to us from  afar.  For  the  people  of  misguidance,  for 
whom  the  verse  was  revealed,  it  is  punishment,  but  for us  it  is  a  blow  from  divine 
compassion in order to train our souls, as atonement for sins, and so that we may raise 
our  spiritual  degrees.  Evidence  that  we  suffered  this  blow  because  we  did  not 
completely appreciate the value of the divine bounty we had received is that we were 
not contented with our sacred service of the Qur’an through the Risale-i Nur, a most 
sacred  striving  in  God’s  way  which  receives  the  effulgence  of  ‘greater  sainthood’ 
through  the  mystery  of  the  legacy  of  prophethood  and  is  a  means  to  attaining  the 
essence  of  the  way  of  the  Companions.  Through  my  severe  warnings  on  several 
occasions, the wish to join a Sufi order was forestalled, the advantages of which are 
very few for us at the moment and could possibly have caused us much  

 

359

harm  in  this  situation.  Otherwise,  both  our unity  would  have  been  destroyed,  and it 
would have caused both differences in ideas which would have reduced the value of 
four alifs – which through solidarity is one thousand one hunded and eleven – to four, 
and mutual antipathy, which would have reduced our strength to nothing. 

The  author  of  the  Gulistan,  Shaykh  Sa‘di  Shirazi,  relates:  “I  saw  one  of  the 
people  of  the  heart  in  a  tekke  while  occupied  with  his  spiritual  journeying.  Several 
days later I saw him among students in the medrese. I asked him why he had left the 
effulgent tekke and come to the religious school. He replied that there everyone could 
save themselves, if they were successful, whereas here in the religious school persons 
of high  aspiration were trying to save many others besides themselves. Nobility and 
high  endeavour  were  theirs;  virtue  and  exertion  were  theirs;  that  was  why  he  went 
there. 

Shaykh Sa‘di wrote a summary of this in his Gulistan. 
So if the small matter of students parsing verbs is superior to the recitations in the 
tekkes,  since  the  Risale-i  Nur  teaches  in  the  clearest  and  most  certain  manner  the 
sacred  truths  of belief  of  the  confession  of  faith:  “I  believe  in  God,  and  His  angels, 
and His Books, and His prophets, and in the Last Day” and silences the most obdurate 
atheists and obstinate philosophers, to abandon it, or cause its activities to come to a 
standstill, or not to be content with it, and desiring the Sufi way to enter the dissolved 
Sufi  tekkes  without  asking  permission  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  is  entirely  wrong  and 
shows how much we deserve this blow of divine compassion. 

                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i 

*  *  * 

A Warning 

[Two short stories] 

T h e  F i r s t : Fifteen years ago when a prisoner-of-war in the north of Russia I 
was  being  held  together  with  ninety  other  officers  in  a  large  factory.  Numerous 
arguments and disturbances arose due to the discomfort and oppressive conditions. I 
used to pacify them, since they all had great respect for me. I appointed four or five 
officers to keep the peace, telling them: “Whenever you hear an uproar, go there and 
help whichever side is in the wrong.” It is a fact that with this precaution a stop was 
put to the noise. They asked me why I helped those who were in the wrong. In reply I 
told them: 

People in the wrong are unfair. They do not give up a single benefit for  

 

360

the sake of public peace forty times greater. Whereas the person who is in the right is 
fair.  He  sacrifices  and  waives  his  own  right,  worth  little,  for  the  advantage  of  his 
friend, which is part of the public peace and worth much. The disturbance ceases and 
peace is restored. The ninety people in this ward can be comfortable. If the person in 
the right is helped, the noise would increase even more. In communal life of this sort, 
the general good takes precedence. 

And so, my brothers! In this communal life of ours, do not say: “I am fed up with 
my brother, for he’s been unfair to me.” To do so is a great error. If such a friend of 
yours has caused you a little harm, your being angry with him causes us harm of high 
cost. It is possible it would even cause excessive harm to the Risale-i Nur. But, praise 
be to God, with our friends being prevented from repeatedly going to be questioned, 
no  harm  came  to  our  powerful  and  rightful  defences.  Otherwise  like  getting 
something as tiny a fly’s wing in one’s eye or a spark falling into gunpowder, due to a 
little pique brothers who are vexed with one another can cause a great deal of harm. 

S e c o n d  S t o r y : There was once an elderly women who had eight sons. She 
gave  each  of  them  a  loaf  of  bread  from  the  loaves  she  had,  but  none  remained  for 
herself. So each of them gave her half his loaf. She then had four loaves, while theirs 
was reduced to half a loaf. 

My brothers! I feel in myself half the pains of the share in this calamity of each of 
the  forty  of  you.  I  take  no  notice  of  my  own  hardships.  One  day  I  felt  excessively 
afflicted and studied my previous position wondering if I was paying the penalty for 
some  error  I  had  committed.  I  saw  that  I  had  no  part  at  all  in  the  fomenting  and 
incitement of this calamity; on the contrary I had employed every possible means to 
avoid it. That means it is a divine decree. It has been planned against us by intriguers 
over  the  past  year,  and  made  inevitable.  It  was  not  possible  to  avoid  it.  It  was 
inevitable that we should be embroiled in it. A hundred thousand thanks to Almighty 
God that He reduced the calamity from a hundred to one. 

In consequence of this fact therefore, do not blame me saying “We are suffering 
this disaster because of you!” Forgive me rather, and pray for me. And do not criticize 
each  other,  saying:  “If  you  had  not  done  such-and-such,  this  would  not  have 
happened.” For example, with one of our brothers mentioning two or three signatures, 
the  plan  the  mischief-makers  were  hatching  in  order  embroil  numerous  people  in  a 
calamity, was restricted and many were saved from it. It was the cause not of harm, 
but  of  great  advantage.  It  resulted  in  many  innocent  people  being  saved  from  this 
disaster. 

                                                                                S a i d   N u r s i 
 

 

361

[This piece is very valuable. Everyone may benefit from it as far as 
the Second Point.] 

In  connection  with  certain  unpleasant  situations  which  come  about  in  Eskişehir 
Prison,  not  through  bad  morality  but  because  of  the  distress,  this  is  about  one  fine 
point  of  a  well-known  verse  that  has  remained  undisclosed,  and  a  point  concerning 
good behaviour. 

FIRST POINT 

Out  of  His  perfect  munificence,  compassion,  and  justice,  Almighty  God  has 
included  in  good  works  an  immediate  reward  and  in  bad  actions  an  immediate 
punishment. He has included in good works spiritual pleasures that recall the rewards 
of the hereafter, while in bad works are spiritual penalties which recall the torments of 
Hell.  

For  example,  love  between  believers  is  a  praiseworthy  action  for  the people  of 
faith.  Included  in  that  good work  are  a  spiritual  pleasure,  a  gratification, an  ease  of 
mind that recall the physical rewards of the hereafter. Anyone who refers to his heart 
will feel this pleasure. 

And  for  example,  enmity  and  hostility  between  believers  are  an  evil  that  cause 
noble  spirits  to  feel  torment  of  the  conscience  enough  to  overwhelm  the  heart  and 
spirit. I myself have experienced it perhaps more than a hundred times: when I have 
felt enmity towards a believing brother I have suffered such torment that it has left me 
in no doubt that it was the immediate punishment for my evil deed. 

And  for  example,  to  be  respectful  towards  those  worthy  of  respect,  and 
compassionate  to  those  worthy  of  compassion,  and  to  assist  them,  are  good  works, 
good deeds. They hold a pleasure and gratification so great they make felt the rewards 
of  the  hereafter.  And  they  so  increase  the  respect  and  compassion  they  make  the 
person  ready  to  sacrifice  his  very  life.  The  pleasure  and  reward  a  mother  receives 
through the compassion she feels for her child may be so great she will sacrifice her 
life due to it. The hen who attacks a lion in order to save her chick is an example of 
this  truth  in  the  animal  kingdom.  This  means  that  there  is  an  immediate  reward  in 
compassion and respect. Magnanimous people of high aspiration feel it, and for this 
reason assume their heroic attitude. 

And for example, in greed and wastefulness is such a punishment that, afflicting 
his heart and spirit, it makes man complaining and anxious, and bewilders him. And 
in  jealousy and envy  is  such an  immediate punishment that  it scorches the one who 
feels them. While in contentment and reliance  

 

362

on  God  is  such  an  immediate,  pleasurable  reward  that  it  dispels  all  the  pains  and 
tribulations of poverty and indigence. 

And for example, in pride and conceit is a heavy burden, for the proud man wants 
respect  from  everyone.  And  because  he  is  despised  due  to  this  desire,  he  suffers 
constant torment. Yes, respect is given, it may not be sought.  

And  for  example,  in  humility  and  the  giving  up  of  egotism  is  a  pleasurable 
reward by which a person is saved from the heavy burden of trying to make himself 
liked. 

And for example, in pessimism and always interpreting things unfavourably is an 
immediate punishment in this world. In accordance with the rule, “Whoever strikes is 
struck,” those who think unfavourably of others are also thought of unfavourably. The 
actions  of  those  who  misinterpret  the  actions  of  their  believing  brothers  are  also 
misinterpreted, and they suffer the punishment for it. 

And  so  on,  all  good  and  bad  deeds  should  be  measured  according  to  this 
yardstick. I beseech divine mercy that those who witness the Qur’anic miraculousness 
manifested at this time in the Risale-i Nur, experience these spiritual pleasures; they 
will not suffer from bad morals, God willing. 

SECOND POINT 

*   *   * 

[The Second of Twenty-Two Points] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
I  created  not  jinn  and  mankind  except  that  they  might  worship  me.  *  No 
sustenance do I require of them, nor do I require that they should feed me. * 
For God is He Who gives [all] sustenance—Lord of  Power—Steadfast [for 
ever].(51:56-8) 

For a long time these verses worried my mind, since according to many Qur’anic 
commentaries  their  apparent  meaning  did  not  reflect  the  Qur’an’s  elevated 
miraculousness. I shall now explain briefly three aspects of their extremely beautiful 
and exalted meanings, which proceed from the effulgence of the Qur’an. 

T h e  F i r s t : Sometimes Almighty God attributes to Himself certain states that 
could pertain to His Messenger, so as to honour and exalt him. Here too, the verses, “I 
created you for worship; not to give Me sustenance and feed me,” have this meaning: 
“My Messenger does not want a wage, recompense, or reward, or to be fed in return 
for his duty of messengership and conveying to you the obligations of worship;” they 
refer to the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) being given food 
and  

 

363

sustenance.  Otherwise  it  would be  making  known  something  self-evident  and clear, 
and would be incompatible with the Qur’an’s miraculous eloquence. 

T  h  e    S  e  c  o  n  d    A  s  p  e  c  t  :  Man  is  excessively  preoccupied  with  his 
sustenance. So lest he is deluded into making his winning it a pretext for neglecting 
worship, or making it an excuse, the verse says: “You were created for worship. The 
result of your creation is worship. Winning sustenance is worship of a sort, from the 
point  of  view  of  its  being  a  divine  command.  I  have  undertaken  to  provide  your 
sustenance and that of your families and animals, my creatures; it pertains to me; you 
were not created to procure food and sustenance, for I am the Provider. I provide the 
sustenance of my servants, your dependants. So do not make it an excuse and give up 
worship!” 

If  its  meaning  is  not  this,  it  becomes  a  statement  of  the  obvious,  for  to provide 
Almighty  God  with  food  and  sustenance  is  self-evidently  impossible.  It  is  an 
established rule of rhetoric that if the meaning of a sentence is clear and obvious, it is 
not that meaning which  is  intended, but a meaning  necessitated by  it and dependent 
on it. For example, if you say to someone: “You are a hafiz,” it is stating the obvious. 
The  intended  meaning  is  “I  know  that  you  are  a  hafiz.”  You  are  informing  him 
because he did not know that you knew.  

Thus,  in  consequence  of  this  rule,  the  meaning  of  the  verse,  in  which  the 
prohibition  of  giving  food  to  Almighty  God  is  a  metaphor,  is  this:  “You  were  not 
created in order to produce food for My creatures, which are Mine and the providing 
of  whose  sustenance  I  have  undertaken.  Your  fundamental  duty  is  worship.  But  to 
strive  to  procure  sustenance  in  accordance  with  My  commands  is  also  a  sort  of 
worship.” 

T h e  T h i r d  A s p e c t : In Sura al-Ikhlas the apparent meaning of,  

He begets not, nor is He begotten(112:3)  

is self-evident and obvious, hence another meaning is intended which is necessitated 
by  it.  That  is  to  say,  Almighty  God  states  extremely  clearly  and  self-evidently  “He 
begets  not,  nor  is  He  begotten,”  meaning:  “Anyone  who  has  a  father  and  mother 
cannot  be  a  god,”  and,  “pre-eternal  and  post-eternal,”  to  deny  the  divinity  of  Jesus 
(UWP),  and  of  Uzayr,  and  the  angels,  and  stars,  and  other  false  gods.  It  is  just  the 
same  with  our  example,  the  verse,  “The  All-Glorious  Provider,  your  object  of 
worship,  does  not  require  sustenance  for  Himself,  you  were  not  created  to  provide 
Him  with  food”  means:  “Things  with  the  ability  to  receive  sustenance  and  food 
cannot  be  gods  and  objects  of  worship,”  meaning:  “Beings  that  are  in  need  of 
sustenance and being provided for are not worthy of worship.” 

                                                                                  S a i d   N u r s i  
 

 

364

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Or while they slept for their afternoon rest.(7:4) 

This  was  written  in  connection  with  Re’fet  being  curious  and  asking  about  the 
word ‘qa’ilun – slept for their afternoon rest – in the verse, “Or while they  slept for 
their afternoon rest” and to prevent his diamond-like pen becoming idle in prison, and 
lethargic, as a result of sleeping after the morning prayer like the others. 

Sleep is of three sorts: 
The First is Ghaylula. This is from pre-dawn to forty minutes or so after the sun 
has  risen,  the  time  when  prayer  is  lawful  but  reprehensible.  Sleep  at  this  time  is 
contrary to the Practices of the Prophet (UWBP), since according to Hadiths, it leads 
to  a  decrease  in  livelihood  and  its  being  unfruitful.  The  most  appropriate  time  for 
preparing to earn one’s living  is when  it is cool. One  is overcome by lethargy when 
this  has  passed.  It  has  been  established  by  many  experiences  that  this  is  both 
detrimental to the day’s labour and indirectly to one’s livelihood, and is the cause of 
unfruitfulness. 

The Second  is Faylula. This is from the afternoon prayer till sunset. Sleep at this 
time leads to a diminution of life, that is, it makes life that day shorter and pass in a 
state  of  semi-sleep  and  drowsiness,  thus  causing  a  physical  deficiency  to  life. 
Moreover,  immaterially,  since  most  of  the  day’s  results,  material  and  immaterial, 
become  apparent  after  the  afternoon  prayer,  to  pass  that  time  in  sleep  as  though 
prevents the results being reaped and the day becomes as though unlived. 

The Third is Qaylula, which is in accord with the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices.1 
It is from mid-morning to just past noon. Such sleep is Sunna since it allows a person 
to rise at night to pray. So too it is the custom in the Arabian Peninsula to rest from 
work  at  noon  when  it  is  intensely  hot,  corroborating  this  practice  of  the  Prophet 
(UWBP).  This  sleep  augments  both  life  and  sustenance.  For  half  an  hour’s  Qaylula 
sleep is the equivalent of two hours’ sleep at night. This means it adds one and a half 
hours’  to  a  person’s  life  every  day.  It  saves  one  and  a  half  hours  from  the  hand  of 
sleep, the brother of death, and gives it life, increasing the time of working for one’s 
livelihood. 

                                                                     

                                                 

Albani, Sahih Jami‘ al-Saghir, No: 4307. 

1 Ibn Maja, Siyam, 22; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, iv, 531; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, 330; al-

 

365

“This is good as well” 

While reciting, “Endless blessings and endless peace be upon you, O Messenger 
of God!” in the tesbihat  following the prayers, I  saw from afar a  subtle point which 
gradually  unfolded.  I  was  unable  to  grasp  all  of  it,  and  shall  recount  one  or  two 
sentences by way of alluding to it. 

I saw that the world of the night is like a newly opened dwelling of the world. I 
entered it during ‘Isha, the prayer at nightfall. Since man is connected to all the world, 
through  an  extraordinary  expansion  of  the  imagination  I  saw  the  mighty  world  that 
night as a dwelling. Living  creatures and men became so tiny  they were  invisible.  I 
observed  with  the  imagination  that  the  only  thing  that  inhabited  the  dwelling  and 
made it familiar, and filled it with light, was the collective personality of Muhammad 
(UWBP).  As  a  person  greets  those  present  when  he  enters  a  house,  I  was 
overwhelmed  with  the  desire  to  say:  “Endless  peace  be  upon  you,  O  Messenger  of 
God!”1 It was as though I was greeting him to the number of all men and jinn. That is 
to  say,  I  offered  greetings,  meaning:  I  renew  my  allegiance  to  you,  accept  your 
mission,  submit  to  the  laws  and  commands  you  brought,  and  state  through  the 
greetings that they  will be safe  from our assaults, and making  speak all the parts of 
my world and all jinn and men, all conscious beings, I offer greetings in their name. 

As  he  illuminated  my  world  through  the  light  and  gift  he  brought,  so  he 
illuminates  and  fills  with  bounties  the worlds  of  everyone  in  this  world.  In  grateful 
response  for  the  gift,  I  exclaimed:  “Endless  blessings  be  upon  you!”  That  is,  “We 
cannot  respond  to  this  goodness  of  yours,  so  we  show  our  gratitude  to  you  by 
beseeching that mercy be bestowed upon you from our Creator’s treasury of mercy, to 
the  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  heavens.”  I  perceived  this  meaning  in  my 
imagination. 

In  respect  of  his  worship  and  on  account  of  his  being  turned  from  creation  to 
Creator,  the  person  of  Muhammad  (UWBP)  requires  blessings  which  have  the 
meaning of mercy. While in respect of his messengership and  

                                                 

1 The divine mercy received by Muhammad (UWBP) looks to the needs of all his community 
through all eternity. For which reason, endless greetings are appropriate. If someone enters a vast house 
like the world, desolate and empty and dark due to heedlessness, how frightened and dismayed he will 
be. Then suddenly the house is lit up and a familiar, friendly, lovable and beloved Lieutenant appears 
in the forefront. If he describes and makes known the house’s Compassionate and Generous Owner 
through all its fittings and furnishings, you can understand what joy, familiarity, happiness, light, and 
ease it will give. From this you may appreciate the value and pleasure of the greetings for the 
Messenger (UWBP). 

 

366

being  the  envoy  sent  from  Creator  to  creation,  he  requires  peace.  He  is  worthy  of 
peace to the number of jinn and men, and we offer a general renewal of our allegiance 
to  their  number.  So  too  he  is  worthy  of blessings  from  the  treasury  of mercy  to the 
number of the inhabitants of the  heavens and in the  name of all of them. For it was 
through the Light  he brought that the perfections  of all things became apparent, and 
the value of beings was made manifest, and the dominical duties of creatures could be 
observed,  and  the  divine  purposes  in  creatures  were  made  known.  Therefore,  if  all 
things  uttered  verbally  what  they  express  through  their  tongues  of  disposition,  it  is 
certain that they would declare: “Blessings and peace be upon  you, O Messenger of 
God!”, and we say in the name of all of them: “Endless blessings and endless peace 
be  upon  you  O  Prophet  of  God,  to  the  number  of  jinn  and  men,  and  of  angels  and 
stars!” 

It is enough that Allah grants him blessings, 
And assigns him peace and benedictions. 
                                                                                         S a i d   N u r s i 

*  *  * 

My Dear Brother! 
You want an explanation of the Unity of Existence. In one of the Flashes of the 
Thirty-First  Letter  there  is  a  very  powerful  and  elucidating  answer  to  Muhyiddin’s 
ideas concerning this matter. For now we just say the following: 

Teaching  this  question  of  the  Unity  of  Existence  to  people  at  the  present  time 
causes  serious  harm.  Like  when  metaphors  and  similes  pass  from  the  hands  of  the 
learned  to  those  of  the  common  people  and  knowledge  passes  from  scholars  to  the 
ignorant,  they  are  thought  to  be  literally  true,1  so  when  elevated  truths  such  as  the 
Unity  of  Existence  pass  to  the  heedless  and  to  the  common  people  submerged  in 
causes, they are thought to be Nature, and cause three significant instances of harm. 

T h e  F i r s t : The way of the Unity of Existence is quite simply to deny the 
universe on account of Almighty God. Despite this, when it is adopted by the heedless 
common  people  and  enters  their  ideas  which  are  tainted  by  materialist  thought  in 
particular,  it  leads  to  denial  of  the  Godhead  on  account  of  the  universe  and 
materiality. 

                                                 

1 Just like the two angels, called the Bull and the Fish in connection with certain metaphors, were 

supposed by the common people to be a vast bull and enormous fish. 

 

367

T h e  S e c o n d : The way of the Unity of Existence rejects the dominicality of 
anything other than God so vehemently that it denies everything other than God and 
removes  duality.  Since  it  does  not  recognize the  independent  existence  of  anything, 
let alone that of evil-commanding souls, with the predominance of the idea of nature 
at this time and pride and egotism inflating the evil-commanding soul and causing the 
hereafter and the Creator to be forgotten, to inculcate the Unity of Existence in people 
whose  evil-commanding  souls  are  small  pharaohs  and  quite  simply  are  disposed  to 
taking their own selves  as their objects of  worship, so inflates the evil-commanding 
soul that – I seek refuge with God – it can no longer be contained.  

T h e  T h i r d : While the All-Glorious One is free and exempt from, pure of 
and exalted above all change, alteration, division, and being comprehended in time or 
place,  the  Unity  of  Existence  gives  rise  to  conceptions  that  are  not  fitting  for  His 
necessary existence, holiness, and being free of all defect, and leads to false teachings. 
Yes, if one who speaks of the Unity of Existence rises in the mind from the ground to 
the  Pleiades,  leaves  the  universe  behind  and  fixes  his  gaze  on  the  sublime  throne, 
ecstatically  reckoning  the  universe  to  be  non-existent,  through  the  strength  of  his 
belief  he  may  see  everything  to  be  directly  from  the  Single  One  of  Unity.  But  the 
person who stands behind the universe and looks at it, and sees causes before him and 
looks  from  the  ground  may  possibly become  submerged  in  causes  and  immersed  in 
the swamp of nature. The person who rises in the mind to the divine throne may say 
like Jalaluddin Rumi: “Listen! The words you hear uttered by everyone, you may hear 
as uttered by Almighty God, like natural gramophones.” But if you say to the one who 
cannot  rise  as  high  as  Jalaluddin,  nor  see  all  beings  from  the  ground  to  the  divine 
throne  in  the  form  of  mirrors:  “Listen!  You  will  hear  the  divine  speech  from 
everything,”  he  will  in  effect  fall  from  the  throne  to  the  ground,  and  will  also  be 
afflicted by false imaginings contrary to the truth! 

Say: “God [sent it down]”: then leave them to plunge in vain discourse and 
trifling.(6:91) * Glory be to the One whose Essence is holy above anything 
similar to It and whose attributes are free of anything resembling them, and 
whose signs testify to His dominicality, may His glory be exalted, for there is 
no god but He. 

                                                                                    S a i d   N u r s i 

 
 

*   *   * 

 

368

The Answer to a Question 

I do not have the time to weigh up the ideas of Mustafa Sabri1 and those of Musa 
Bekûf.2 I shall only say this much, that the one went to one extreme and the other, to 
the other extreme. Mustafa Sabri was right relatively to Musa Bekuf, but it is not right 
to denigrate someone like Muhyiddin who was a miracle of the Islamic sciences. 

Yes, Muhyiddin was himself rightly-guided and acceptable, but should not be the 
guide and instructor with all his works. Since he very often proceeded in the realities 
without balance,  he opposed  the  rules  of  the  Sunnis  and  some of  the  things  he  said 
apparently  denote  misguidance.  However,  he  himself  was  free  of  misguidance.  A 
word  may  sometimes  appear  to  be  unbelief,  but  the  one  who  speaks  it  is  not  an 
unbeliever. Mustafa Sabri did not take these points into consideration; he was extreme 
concerning certain points of Sunni law, due to bigotry. 

As for Musa Bekûf, he was excessively in favour of renewal; because of this and 
the  concessions  he  made  to modernity  in  respect  of his  ideas,  he  was  very  much  in 
error. He corrupted some of the truths of Islam with his false interpretations. He went 
far  to  excess  by  maintaining  that  someone  rejected  like  Abu’l-A‘la  al-Ma‘arrê  was 
superior to authoritative scholars, and favouring disproportionately matters  stated by 
Muhyiddin which oppose the Sunnis because they suited his own ideas. 

Muhyiddin said: “Other people who are not one of us and do not know our station 
should  not read our books,  for  it  may  be  damaging  for  them.”  Yes,  it  is  harmful  to 
read Muhyiddin’s books at the present time, especially the matters related to the Unity 
of Existence. 

                                                                             S a i d   N u r s i  

*   *   * 

 
 
 

                                                 

1 Mustafa Sabri (1869-1954). A leading religious scholar and public figure in the last decades of 
the Ottoman Empire, he was publisher of the journal Beyanu’l-Hak, and Shaykh al-Islam 1919-1920. 
He left Turkey in 1922 and remained in exile in Egypt till his death. 

2 Mûsa Jarullah Bigi(yef) was a native of Turkestan and a reformist Islamic scholar and prominent 
figure. He was sent into exile by the Russians in 1904 together with Abdurrashid Ibrahim, and was the 
author of many works. 

 

369

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 

I  shall  explain  a  matter  that  unfolded  before  the  gaze  of  my  imagination  one 
glittering  night  of  the  festival,  while  watching  from  my  prison  window  through  the 
lens of prudence and foresight the laughter of mankind that would turn into tears. As 
the  lives  of  people  of  previous  ages  who  lie  in  the  graveyard  may  be  seen  in  the 
cinema, so I as though saw the moving corpses of people who would inhabit it in the 
near future. I wept for those merry-makers. All of a sudden a feeling of desolation and 
pity  came  over  me.  I  turned  to  my  intellect  and  asked  of  reality:  “What  is  this 
imagining?” Reality replied, saying: 

In fifty years time, out of the fifty who are now laughing and enjoying themselves 
with such  joy  five will be bent and stooping seventy-year-olds, while  forty-five will 
have  rotted  in  the  graveyard.  Those  beautiful  features  and  joyful  smiles  will  have 
been transformed into their opposites. According to the rule of “All that is coming is 
close,” since it is to some degree true that things that are going to happen in the near 
future are seen to have already arrived, then surely what you see is not imagination. 

Furthermore, since the heedless laughter of this world veils bitter facts that thus 
turn  it  into  tears,  and  is  temporary  and  subject  to  decline,  most  certainly  it  is  only 
thankful, innocent enjoyment within the bounds of the licit, which leads to awareness 
of God’s presence and dispels heedlessness, and pleasures that will be permanent by 
reason  of  their  reward  that  will  cause  joy  to  wretched  man’s  eternity-worshipping 
heart and his spirit, which has an irresistible desire for immortality, and  make them 
smile. 

It  is  because  of  this  that  there  are  among  the  narrations  many  that  strongly 
encourage  thanks  and  remembrance  of  God  at  festival  times,  in  order  to  prevent 
heedlessness  from  prevailing  and  deviation  into  the  illicit.  To  do  this  at  such  times 
may  transform  the  bounties  of  joy  and  happiness  into  thanks  and  make  the  bounty 
continue and increase it. For thanks increases bounty and dispels heedlessness. 

                                                                              S a i d   N u r s i  

 
 

*   *   * 

 

370

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 

This1 concerns one point contained in the verse, 

The [human] soul is certainly prone to evil,(12:53) 

and in the Hadith the meaning of which is, “Your worst enemy is your soul.”2 

The  person  who  loves  himself  –  if  his  evil-commanding  soul  has  not  been 
purified  –  will  love  no  one  else.  Even  if  he  does  apparently,  he  does  not  do  so 
sincerely, but only for the pleasure of it or for some good he receives. He always tries 
to  make  himself  liked.  Also,  he  never  ascribes  faults  to  himself;  he  defends  and 
exonerates  himself  like  a  lawyer.  He  praises  himself,  exaggerating  and  even  lying, 
showing  himself to be free of  fault, as though  sanctifying  himself, and according to 
his degree receives a slap from the verse,  

Who takes as his god his desires.(25:43; 45:23) 

His self-praise and efforts to make himself liked have the reverse effect, for he attracts 
contempt and is treated coldly.  He also loses sincerity  in  his actions that  look to the 
hereafter and they become mixed with hypocrisy. He is defeated by the emotions and 
desires of the soul, which are blind to the consequences, do not think of results, and 
are  obsessed  with  present  pleasure;  he  serves  a  year’s  prison  sentence  due  to  one 
hour’s  pleasure  demanded  by  his  emotions,  which  have  gone  astray.  He  pays  ten 
years’ penalty on account of one minute’s pride or revenge. Quite simply like a silly 
child who sells the portion of the Qur’an he is learning to buy a single sweet, in order 
to  flatter  his  emotions,  gratify  his  senses,  and  satisfy  his  appetites,  he  makes  his 
diamond-like  good  deeds  the  means  to  egotistical  pleasures  as  insignificant  as 
fragments of glass,  and he loses out in profitable works.  

O God! Preserve us from the evil of the soul and of Satan, and from the evil of 
jinn and men. 

 

*   *   * 

                                                 

1 This piece is beneficial for everyone. 
2 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 143; al-Ghazali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, iii, 4. 

 

371

A Question 

How can incarceration in Hell for an infinite duration in return for unbelief for a 

short duration be justice? 

T h e  A n s w e r : Reckoning a year to be three hundred and sixty-five days, the 
law  of  justice  requires  for  a  one-minute  murder,  seven  million  eight  hundred  and 
eighty-four thousand minutes’ imprisonment. So, since one minute’s unbelief is like a 
thousand murders, according to the law of human justice, someone who lives a life of 
twenty  years  in unbelief and dies  in that state deserves  imprisonment for fifty-seven 
billion,  two  hundred  and  one  thousand  two  hundred  million  years.  It  may  be 
understood from this how conformable with divine justice is the verse,  

They will dwell therein for ever.(33:65, etc.) 

The  reason  for  the  connection  between  these  two  numbers,  so  far  from  one 
another, is this: since murder and unbelief are destruction and aggression, they have 
an  effect  on  others.  A  murder  which  takes  one  minute  negates  on  average  at  least 
fifteen  years of the victim’s life, so the murderer is imprisoned in their place. While 
since one minute of unbelief denies a thousand and one divine names and denigrates 
their  inscriptions,  violates  the  rights  of  the  universe  and  denies  its  perfections,  and 
gives the lie to innumerable evidences of divine unity and rejects their testimony, the 
unbeliever is cast down to the lowest of the low for more than a thousand years, and 
“dwells” in imprisonment. 

                                                                             S a i d   N u r s i  

 
 
 

*   *   * 

 

372

A Meaningful and Subtle ‘Coincidence’ 

The  ‘coincidence’1  of Article  163,2  under  which  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  were 
charged and sentenced, and the number of deputies, one hundred and sixty-three out 
of two hundred, who allotted one hundred and fifty thousand liras for the medrese3 of 
the  Risale-i  Nur’s  author  in  effect  says  this:  the  appreciative  signatures  of  one 
hundred and sixty-three deputies of the government of the republic quashes the ruling 
of Article 163 of the Criminal Code concerning him. 

Another subtle and meaningful ‘coincidence’ is this: the one hundred and twenty-
eight  parts  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  are put together  in  one  hundred  and  fifteen  booklets. 
The  number  of  days  from  when  the  Risale-i  Nur  students  and  its  author  were  first 
arrested on 27th April, 1935 to the date on which the court passed judgement on 19th 
August, 1935 was one hundred and fifteen coinciding with the number of books of the 
Risale-i  Nur.  In  addition,  the  one hundred  and  fifteen  people  found  guilty  coincides 
with  the  number  exactly,  showing  that  the  calamity  visited  on  the  Risale-i  Nur 
students and its author is being regulated by a Hand of Favour.4 

 
 

*   *   * 

                                                 

1 For ‘coincidence’ (tevâfuk), see, note 22, page 199. (Tr.) 
2 Article 163 of the Turkish Criminal Code. (Tr.) 
3 This refers to the Medresetü’z-Zehra. See, note 21, page 325.  (Tr.) 
4 It is worth noting that the arrests of some of the Risale-i Nur students started on 25 April 1935. 
Thus, because in the indictment one hundred and seventeen people were cited as guilty – the names of 
two of them had been repeated – the number shown for the students was one hundred and seventeen, 
this coincided with the one hundred and seventeen days from the date that group were arrested to the 
date of the court’s judgement, adding a further subtlety to the former ‘coincidence.’ 

 

373

The Twenty-Eighth Point 
of the Twenty-Eighth Flash 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
[So]  they  should  not  strain  their  ears  in  the  direction  of  the  Exalted 
Assembly, but be cast away from every side * Repulsed, for they are under a 
perpetual penalty, *  Except  such as  snatch away  something by  stealth, and 
they  are  pursued  by  a  flaming  fire,  of  piercing  brightness.(37:8-10)  *  And 
We  have  adorned  the  lowest  heaven  with  lamps,  and  We  have  made  them 
missiles to drive away the evil ones.(67:5) 

An important point concerning verses like these will be explained in connection 

with criticisms made by the people of misguidance. It is as follows: 

Spies  from  among the  jinn  and satans  eavesdrop  on  events  in  the  heavens,  and 
like soothsayers, mediums, and some spiritualists, convey news from the World of the 
Unseen. So that their giving information about the Unseen should not give rise to any 
doubts when the Qur’an was first revealed, their continual espionage was prevented to 
a  greater  extent  and  they  were  repulsed  by  shooting  stars.  The  following  is  a  brief 
reply to an extremely important question in three parts concerning the above verses, 
which are about this subject. 

Q u e s t i o n : It is understood from verses like these that spying satans infiltrate 
the  distant  lands  of  the  heavens  in  order  to  learn  of  some  minor  and  even  personal 
event in the Unseen. Rumours of such minor events as though spread everywhere in 
those  vast  lands,  and  any  satan  anywhere  may  hear  a  confused  version  of  them  and 
pass it on. However, reason and science cannot accept such a thing. 

Also, it is said that some of the people of prophethood and some wonder-workers 
as though pluck the fruits of Paradise from nearby, which according to definite verses 
of the Qur’an, is above the heavens, and they sometimes gaze on Paradise from near 
at hand. This matter, which concerns infinite distance within infinite proximity, is not 
conformable with the understanding of the present age. 

Also,  the  unimportant  situation  of  an  unimportant  person  being  the  subject  of 
discussion in the Sublime Assembly in the universal, vast land of the heavens is not 
conformable  with  the  wisdom  of  the  utterly  wise  administration  of  the  universe. 
Nevertheless, these three matters are considered to be among the truths of Islam. 

 

374

T h e  A n s w e r :  
Firstly:  In  the  seven  ‘Steps’  of  the  treatise  called  the  Fifteenth  Word,  the 
repulsion  and  ejection  with  stars of  diabolical  spies  from  the  heavens,  expressed  by 
the verse, 

And  We  have  adorned  the  lowest  heaven  with  lamps,  and  We  have  made 
them missiles to drive away the evil ones,  

is proved so certainly with seven premises that it convinces the obdurate materialist, 
silencing him and forcing him to accept it. 

Secondly: We shall allude to those three truths which are supposed to be far from 

the reason with a comparison that will bring them close to narrow minds.  

For example, if a state’s Army Office is in the east of the country, its Ministry of 
Justice  in  the  west,  its  Education  Ministry  in  the  north,  its  Religious  Affairs 
Department in the south, and its Civil Service in the centre, and each department and 
ministry communicates and is connected with the others by means of radio, telephone, 
and telegraph in most regular and orderly fashion, the whole country will quite simply 
be  its  Army  Office  the  same  as  it  is  its  Ministry  of  Justice,  and  will  be  its  learned 
establishment as it is its Civil Service. 

And for example, it sometimes happens that numerous countries and states whose 
capitals are different have sovereignty over a single country in different ways, through 
colonies, or concessions, or trade. Although the country’s subjects and nation are one, 
through  its  concessions,  each  state  has  connections  with  them.  The  affairs  of  those 
states,  which  are  distant  from one  another,  touch  on  each  other;  they  come  close  to 
each  other  in  all  the  houses  of  the  country,  and  they share  in  each  of  its  people.  Its 
minor  matters  are  seen  in  a  minor  sphere  in  its  points  of  contact.  For  each  minor 
matter  is  not  taken  from  the  universal  sphere.  But  when  those  minor  matters  are 
discussed,  they  are  mentioned  as  though  they  are  taken  from  the  universal  sphere, 
since they are directly in accordance with the universal sphere’s laws; they are given 
the form of a matter discussed in that sphere. 

Like these two comparisons, although the land of the heavens is extremely distant 
in respect of its centre and capital, it has immaterial telephones reaching the hearts of 
men in the land of the earth. Furthermore, it does not only look to the corporeal world, 
but  in  one  respect  encompasses  the  Manifest  World  since  it  comprises  the  Spirit 
World and World of the Inner Dimension of Things. 

The sphere of influence of Paradise too, which is from the world of eternity and 

everlasting realm, stretches out and spreads in luminous fashion  

 

375

beneath the veil of the manifest, despite its infinite distance. Just as although, through 
the wisdom and power of the All-Wise and Glorious Maker, the centres of the senses 
in man’s head are all different, each governs the body taking it under its disposal; so 
the universe, the macroanthropos, comprises thousands of worlds one within the other 
like concentric circles. Sometimes the situations and events that occur in them are the 
object of attention in respect of their universality and particularity and insignificance 
and  immensity;  that  is  to  say,  those  particulars  are  to  be  seen  in  particular,  near 
places, while the universals and immense matters are seen in universal, vast stations. 

However,  sometimes  a  minor,  particular  event  occupies  a  vast  world.  In 
whichever corner of the world you listen, you will hear about it. And sometimes some 
vast  mobilization  is  not  against  the  enemy’s  forces,  but  for  a  show  of  pomp  and 
majesty. For example, the event of Muhammad (UWBP) and sacred occurrence of the 
Qur’an’s  revelation  were  the  most  important  events  in  the  land  of  the  heavens  and 
were  bruited  in  every  corner  of  it.  Then  there  were  more  falling  stars,  which  was  a 
dominical sign proclaiming the degree of splendour of the Qur’anic revelation and its 
glittering sovereignty and the degree of its truthfulness, which could be penetrated by 
no  doubt,  and  was  expressed  and  illustrated  by  the  sentries  posted  on  the  distant, 
towering bastions of the vast heavens raining down missiles to drive off and repulse 
the devils. The Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition expounds and proclaims that cosmic 
proclamation, and alludes to those heavenly signs. 

Yes, such a tremendous heavenly sign, and the spying satans, who being made to 
do battle with the angels although they could have been blown away at the puffing of 
an  angel,  was  surely  to  show  the majesty  of the  Qur’anic  Revelation’s  sovereignty. 
Also, this splendid exposition of the Qur’an and vast heavenly mobilization  indicate 
that there was nowhere the jinns and devils could interfere on the long way from the 
heart  of  Muhammad  (UWBP)  to the  world of  the  heavens and  the  Sublime  Throne, 
not that the jinns and satans possess  some power which drove the  inhabitants of the 
heavens to fight them and defend against them. The Qur’anic Revelation was a truth 
discussed by all the angels in the heavens; in order, the satans were compelled to rise 
to the heavens to draw close to it a little, but were not successful and were repulsed. 
This  shows  that  the  Revelation  that  came  to  the  heart  of  Muhammad  (UWBP),  and 
Gabriel who came to his presence, and the truths of the Unseen which appeared to his 
gaze,  were  sound  and  straight  and  could  be  pierced  by  no  doubts.  The  Qur’an  of 
Miraculous Exposition tells this in miraculous fashion. 

 

376

As  for  Paradise  being  seen  from  very  close  despite  its  great  distance  and being 
part  of  the  World  of  Eternity,  and  sometimes  fruits  being  plucked  from  it,  this 
transient  world  and  Manifest  Realm  is  a  veil  to  the  World  of  the  Unseen  and 
Everlasting Realm as may be understood from the above two comparisons. Paradise 
may be seen everywhere by means of the mirror of the World of Similitudes, despite 
the  distance  of  its  supreme  centre.  So  too,  where  there  is  belief  at  the  degree  of 
‘absolute  certainty’,  Paradise  may  have  sorts  of  colonies  and  ministries  in  this 
transient  world  –  if  there  is  no  mistake  in  the  comparison  –  and  by  means  of  the 
telephone of the heart, may communicate with elevated spirits, and its gifts may come 
to them. 

As  for  a  universal  sphere  being  preoccupied  with  particular,  personal  matters; 
that is to say, satans rising to the heavens and eavesdropping in order to bring reports 
of the Unseen to soothsayers, and their bringing false, confused news, as is described 
in Qur’anic commentaries, it must be as follows: it is not a question of their going as 
far as the capital of the land of the heavens and gathering particular news; but of there 
being certain places resembling police outposts – if the metaphor is not mistaken – in 
the  country  of  the  heavens,  which  encompasses  the  atmosphere.  In  these  they  have 
relations  with  the  country  of  the  earth.  The  satans  eavesdrop on  particular  events  in 
those particular places. The  human  heart even is  one such place, where the angel of 
inspiration and personal devil do battle.  

Also,  however  particular  the  truths  of  belief  and  the  Qur’an  and  the  events 
connected  with  Muhammad  (UWBP),  they  are  as  though  the  greatest  and  most 
universal  and  important  events  and  are  published  at  the  sublime  throne  and  in  the 
sphere  of  the  heavens,  the  most  universal  sphere,  in  –  if  the  comparison  is  not 
mistaken  –  the  newspapers  of  the  appointed  events  of  the  universe.  They  are 
discussed on every corner. Since from the heart of Muhammad (UWBP) to the sphere 
of  the  throne  there  is  no  way  the  satans  can  interfere,  they  do  nothing  apart  from 
listening  to  the  heavens.  Thus,  the  verse  proclaims  and  shows  most  eloquently, 
indeed,  miraculously,  how  elevated  and  true  are  the  Qur’anic  revelation  and 
prophethood of Muhammad (UWBP), and that it is in no way possible to oppose them 
or draw close to them with subterfuge or falsehood. 

                                                                                       S a i d   N u r s i 
  
 

 

377

The Twenty-Ninth Flash 

Preface 

Thirteen years ago, my heart combined with my mind and urged me to the way of 
reflective  thought  which  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  commands  with  such 
verses as, 

That you may consider.(2:219; 2:266) *  Perchance they may reflect.(7:176, 
etc.) *  Do they not reflect in their own minds, did God create the heavens 
and the earth?(30:8) * There are signs for those who consider.(13:3, etc.) 

The  Hadith  the  meaning  of  which  is  “An  hour’s  reflective  thought  is  better  than  a 
year’s [supererogatory] worship”1 states that on occasion an hour’s reflection may be 
equivalent  to a  year’s  worship.  It  also  offers  powerful  encouragement  for  reflective 
thought. For myself, in order to preserve the extensive lights and lengthy truths which 
appeared to my mind and heart during the thirteen  years I  have followed this way,  I 
recorded a number of phrases by way of indications, not to point out those lights but 
to indicate their existence, facilitate reflection, and preserve the order. I used to recite 
the  phrases  to  myself  verbally  in  varying  Arabic  terms  when  I  embarked  on  the 
reflection.  Although  repeated  thousands  of  times  over  this  long  period,  I  never 
became wearied, nor did the pleasure they afforded diminish, nor the spirit’s need of 
them lessen. For since the reflection all consisted of flashes from Qur’anic verses, the 
qualities of not causing weariness and preserving their sweetness, which are qualities 
of the verses, were represented in the mirror of that reflective thought. 

I  realized  recently  that  the  powerful  source  of  life  and  brilliant  lights  in  the 

various parts of the Risale-i Nur are flashes of those sequences of 

                                                 

al-Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, i, 78. 

1 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 143; al-Ghazali, Ihya’ ‘Ulum al-Din, iv, 409 (Kitab al-Tafakkur); 

 

378

thought. Thinking that they would affect others as they had affected me, I formed the 
intention  to  set  them  all  down  in  writing  towards  the  end  of  my  life.  For  sure, 
important  parts  of  them  have  been  included  in  the  Risale-i  Nur  but  a  further  power 
and value will be found in them in their totality. 

Since  the  end  of  life  is  not  clear,  and  since  the  conditions  here  of  my 
imprisonment have taken on a form worse than death, not waiting for my life to end, 
on  the  insistence  and  importunity  of  my  brothers  I  have  written  those  sequences  of 
thought without changing them, as seven chapters. 

[The remaining six chapters of this Flash have been published in hand-duplicated 

editions of The Flashes, and not included here.] 

T H E  T H I R D  C H A P T E R 
On the Degrees of ‘God is Most Great!’ 

We  shall  mention  seven  of  its  thirty-three  degrees.  An  important  part  of  those 
degrees  have  been  expounded  in  the  Second  Station  of  the  Twentieth  Letter,  at  the 
end of the Second Stopping-Place of the Thirty-Second Word, and at the beginning of 
the Third Stopping-Place. Those who want to understand the reality of those degrees 
should refer to those two parts of the Risale-i Nur. 

THE FIRST DEGREE 

Say:  “Praise  be  to  God  who  begets  no  son  and  has  no  partner  in  [His] 
dominion: nor [needs] He any to protect Him from humiliation: yes, magnify 
Him for His greatness and glory!”(17:111) 

God is Most Great, may His Glory be exalted! In power and knowledge, greater 
is  He  than  everything.  For  He  is  the  Creator,  the  Maker,  the  Giver  of  Form,  who 
through  His  power  fashions  man  like  the  universe;  He  writes  the  universe  with  the 
pen  of  His  determining  as  He  writes  man  with  the  same  pen.  For  the  macrocosm  is 
like  the  microcosm:  both  are  fashioned  by  His  power,  inscribed  by  His  pen;  He 
creates  the  macrocosm  as  a  place  of  prostration,  while  He  gives  existence  to  the 
microcosm  as  prostrating;  He  brings  the  former  into  being  as  a  property,  while  He 
gives existence to the latter as owned and needy for the property; His art in the former 
displays  it  as  a  book,  while  His  colouring  in  the  latter  shines  through  speech;  His 
power  in  the  former  reveals  His  majesty,  while  His  mercy  in  the  latter  arrays  His 
bounty;  His  majesty  in  the  former  testifies  that  He  is  One,  while  His  bounty  in  the 
latter proclaims that He is Single, Undivided; His stamp  

 

379

on the former is on all things, universal and particular, whether at rest or in motion, 
while  His  seal  on  the  latter  is  on  the  body  and  on  the  limbs,  and  on  their  cells  and 
particles. 

Now consider His works as a whole: you will see as clearly as daylight absolute 
profusion  within  absolute  order  and  regularity;  with  absolute  speed  yet  absolute 
balance; with absolute ease  yet with absolute skill; on a vast scale  yet with absolute 
beauty  of  art;  over  infinite  distances  yet  with  complete  unity  of  kind;  with  absolute 
intermingling,  yet  absolute  differentiation;  with  absolute  lack  of  expense  together 
with  absolute  value.  This  situation  testifies  to  the  mind,  as  it  compels  the  foolish 
dissembler  to  accept,  that  this  art  and  unity  is  the  work  of  a  possessor  of  absolute 
power, a possessor of absolute knowledge. 

In  unity  lies  absolute  ease,  while  in  multiplicity  and  associating  partners  with 

God are incomprehensible difficulties. 

If all things are attributed to one, the universe’s creation is as easy as the creation 
of  a  palm-tree,  and  the  palm-tree  as  the  fruit.  But  when  ascribed  to  multiplicity,  to 
create a palm-tree is as difficult as creating the universe and each fruit as difficult as 
the tree – so difficult as to be impossible. For with a single act, a single person may 
obtain  a  single  result  and  situation  for  many  things  without  difficulty  and  without 
having  recourse  to  other  means.  Whereas  if  the  situation  and  result  are  referred  to 
many, they could be obtained only with great trouble and dispute and pursuing other 
means. It would be like an officer referring his duty to the soldiers, the master builder 
to the stones of a building, the earth to the planets, the waterfall to the drops of water, 
and the central point of a circle to all the points on the circumference. 

Through the mystery of relations an unlimited power is present in unity. A thing 
or cause is not compelled to carry the sources of its strength, and the work resulting 
from the cause acquires greatness in relation to the thing on which it relies. But when 
partners are associated with God, all causes are obliged to carry their own sources of 
strength, and the resulting works diminish to their extent. It is because of this that an 
ant and a fly defeated tyrants, and a tiny seed bears upon it a huge tree. 

If all things are ascribed to one person, there is no need for creation from absolute 
non-existence, for it consists of transferring a being which has existence in knowledge 
to external existence, like transferring the image on the mirror at the back of a camera 
onto photographic paper, thus establishing its external existence with complete ease, 
or like revealing words written in invisible ink by spreading a special substance on the 
writing. 

When things are ascribed to causes and multiplicity, it necessitates their 

 

380

creation  from  absolute  non-existence  and  this  is  impossible,  the  most  difficult  of 
things.  In  unity  is an ease;  it  is  so  easy  as  to  be  necessary.  While  in  multiplicity  is 
great difficulty; such difficulty as to be impossible. 

With unity, it is possible to create a being from absolute non-existence. That is, to 
create  a  being  out  of  pure  non-being  instantaneously,  without  matter,  and  to  pour 
particles into a mould that exists as knowledge without difficulty or confusion. While 
as  all  the  intelligent  agree,  with  multiplicity  and  associating  partners  with  God, 
original  creation  is  not  possible  from  non-existence.  Because  for  the  existence  of  a 
living  creature,  particles  and  elements  dispersed  throughout  the  earth  have  to  be 
gathered together. And when there is no mould existent in knowledge, all the particles 
have to possess all-encompassing knowledge and absolute will so as to preserve the 
particles in the body of the animate creature.  

In addition, there is no need at all for those things assumed to be partners to God, 
just as it is impossible that they should be. To make such a claim, therefore, is purely 
arbitrary; there is nothing in beings to suggest that they have any role in their creation, 
no  sign.  For  the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth  necessitates  perfect,  infinite 
power,  which  is  in  no  need  of  partners.  If  there  were  partners,  it  would  necessitate 
their  limiting  that  infinite  and  utterly  perfect  power  and  bringing  it  to  an  end  in 
infinite  time,  although  there  is  no  necessity  for  this,  indeed,  although  the  reverse  is 
necessitated;  and  this  is  impossible  in  five  respects.  Such  partners  are  therefore 
impossible  and  precluded.  Moreover,  beings  in  no  way  suggest  or  point  to  their 
existence. 

We have expounded this matter in the First Stopping-Place of the Thirty-Second 
Word, showing how all things from minute particles to planets, and from the planets 
to  individual  facial  features  in  the  Second  Stopping-Place,  reject  the  ascribing  of 
partners to God, and pointing out the stamp of divine unity on each of them. 

Just  as  He  has  no  partners,  so  He  has  no  assistants  or  ministers.  Causes  are 
merely fine veils to the disposals of pre-eternal power; in reality they have no creative 
effect. For man is the highest of causes and the one with the most extensive will, and 
out of  a  hundred parts  of  the most obvious  volitional  acts  such  as eating,  speaking, 
and thinking, he has only one dubious part. If the true power of disposal of the highest 
of causes and the one with the most extensive will is thus restricted, how is it possible 
for the animals and inanimate creatures to have a part in the creation and dominicality 
of the Creator of the heavens and the earth? Just as the envelope in which a king sends 
a gift, or the handkerchief in which he wraps a present, or the retainer who brings the 
gift to you, cannot be partners in the king’s  

 

381

sovereignty,  so  the  causes  by  which  bounties  are  sent,  or  the  coffers  containing  the 
bounties  stored up for us, or the causes wrapped up as divine  gifts and sent to us as 
presents, cannot be partners to or assistants of God, or intermediaries which have any 
effect. 

THE SECOND DEGREE 

God  is  Most  Great,  may  His  glory  be  exalted;  He  is  greater  than  everything  in 
power  and knowledge.  He  is  the  Creator,  All-Knowing,  the  Maker,  All-Wise,  Most 
Merciful, All-Compassionate. For the beings of the earth and the lofty celestial bodies 
in the garden of the universe are self-evidently miracles of an All-Knowing Creator’s 
power;  and  the  adorned, multicoloured plants  laid out  in  the  park of  the  face  of  the 
earth and the many varieties of animals displayed and dispersed through the park are 
necessarily  the  wonders  of  art  of  an  All-Wise  Maker;  and  the  smiling  flowers  and 
decorated fruits in the gardens of this park are clearly the gifts of One Most Merciful 
and Compassionate. These miracles of power and wonders of art and gifts of mercy 
testify, call out, and proclaim that their Creator, Fashioner, and Bestower is powerful 
over all things, and knowing of all things, that His mercy and knowledge encompass 
all  things.  In  relation  to  His  power  particles  and  stars  are  equal;  few  and  many  are 
equal; small and great, finite and infinite are equal. All the events of the past and its 
strange  happenings,  which  are  miracles  of  an  All-Wise  Maker’s  art,  testify  that  the 
Maker is powerful over all the possibilities of the future and its strange events, for He 
is an All-Knowing Creator, Exalted, All-Wise. 

Glory be to the One who made the earth the exhibition of His art, the gathering 
place of His creatures, the manifestation of His power, the means of His wisdom, the 
garden  of  His  mercy,  the  arable  field  of  His  Paradise,  the  place  of  passage  of 
creatures, the river-bed through which beings flow, the measure of His artefacts. 

The  embellished  animals,  the  decorated  birds,  the  fruitful  trees,  the  flower-
adorned plants are all miracles of His knowledge, marvels of His fashioning, gifts of 
His munificence, proofs of His grace. 

Blossoms smiling with the adornment of fruits, birds singing in the early morning 
breeze,  rain  pattering  on  the  petals  of  flowers,  mothers  tenderly  embracing  their 
young, all make known One All-Loving, make loved One Most Merciful, Most Kind 
and Generous to jinn and man, to spirit beings, the angels, and to animals. 

Grains and fruits, seeds and flowers are miracles of wisdom, marvels of art, gifts 
of mercy, proofs of unity; they testify to His grace in the realm of the hereafter. They 
are truthful witnesses testifying that their Creator is  

 

382

powerful  over  all  things,  and  knowing  of  all  things;  that  with  His  mercy  and 
knowledge and creativity, planning, art, and fashioning He encompasses all things. In 
relation to His creation, planning, art, and fashioning, the sun is a tiny seed; a star, a 
flower; the earth, a grain. 

For seeds and fruits are mirrors of unity in every part of multiplicity; they point to 
divine  determining;  they  are  signs  of  power  showing  the  unity  of  the  multiplicity’s 
source.  Proceeding  from  it  they  testify  to  the  unity  of  their  Creator’s  art  and 
fashioning. Then on their coming to an end in unity they recount the wisdom of their 
Maker’s creativity and planning.  

Seeds  and  fruits  are  also  allusions  of  wisdom  indicating  that  the  universe’s 
Creator looks with His all-encompassing view to the particular, then to the parts. For 
the  fruits  are  clearly  the  aim  of  the  tree’s  creation.  Thus,  man  is  the  aim  of  the 
universe, and the chief aim of the Creator of beings. Man’s heart is like a  seed, and 
the most luminous mirror to the Maker of creatures. It  is due to this  wisdom that in 
the universe, insignificant man is the chief means to and reason for the resurrection of 
beings, and the destruction, transformation, change and renewal of the universe. 

God  is  Most  Great!  O  Mighty  One!  The  mind  cannot  penetrate  the  essence  of 

Your tremendousness! 

All beings recite together “There is no god but He!” 
Perpetually seeking their needs, they declare “O Truth!” 
Altogether they recite “O Living One!”  

THE THIRD DEGREE2 

Second Word. 

This  is  explained  at  the  beginning  of  the  Third  Stopping-Place  of  the  Thirty-

God  is  Most  Great,  may  His  glory  be  exalted!  –  in  respect  of  power  and 
knowledge  greater  than  all  things.  For  He  is  All-Powerful,  the  Determiner,  All-
Knowing,  All-Wise,  the  Giver  of  Form,  Munificent,  Gracious,  the  Adorner,  the 
Bestower  of  Bounties,  Loving,  who  makes  Himself  known,  Most  Merciful,  All-
Compassionate, Kind, the Beauteous One of Absolute Beauty and Perfection, the Pre-
Eternal Inscriber. The reality of the universe as a whole and with its parts, and with its 
levels and pages, and the reality of beings as a whole and as individuals, in regard to 
existence and permanence consist of :—   

                                                 

2 This third degree considers a flower and a beautiful woman. The huge spring is a flower, and so 

is Paradise. They are the places of manifestation of this degree. The world is a vast, beautiful human 
being. Houris, and spirit beings, animals, and men, all as realms of being, bear the meaning of a human 
being; through their pages, they display the divine names this degree depicts. 

 

383

The  orderly,  measured  writings  of  the  pen  of  His  determining  and  decree, 

according to knowledge and wisdom; 

The depictions of the compasses of His knowledge and wisdom, traced with art;  
The  adornments  of  the  shining  hand  of  His  art  and  bestowal  of  form,  His 

embellishing and illuminating, with grace and munificence;  

The flowers of the subtleties of His grace and munificence, His making Himself 

known and loved, bountifully, with mercy; 

The fruits of the superabundance of the fount of His mercy and bounty, His pity 

and tenderness, with beauty and perfection; 

The  flashes  of  an  eternal  beauty,  a  perpetual  perfection,  testified  to  by  the 
transience of the mirrors and flowing on of the places of reflection together with the 
continuance of the beauty’s manifestation throughout the passage of the seasons, the 
centuries, and epochs, together with the perpetual bestowal of bounty throughout the 
passage of creatures, time, and beings. 

Yes, the fleeting nature of the mirrors and the passing of beings together with the 
constant manifestations and effulgences shows with the utmost clarity that the evident 
beauty and shining perfection do not belong to the places of manifestation; they prove 
most clearly and eloquently that they belong to a transcendent Beauty, a transcendent 
Bestower, to the Necessary Existent, the Enduring One, the Loving One. 

For a perfect work self-evidently points to a perfect act. A perfect act necessarily 
points  to  a  perfect  name  and  a  perfect  performer  of  the  act.  And  a  perfect  name 
doubtlessly  points  to  a  perfect  attribute.  A  perfect  attribute  indubitably  points  to  a 
perfect quality. And a perfect quality certainly points in a way worthy of such a one, 
to the perfection of his essence. This is absolutely certain. 

THE FOURTH DEGREE  

God is Most Great, may His glory be exalted! For He is All-Just, the Pre-Eternal 
All-Wise Arbiter and Sovereign, who established the body of the tree of the universe 
in  six days  in  accordance with the principles of  His wisdom and will.  He divided it 
into sections in accordance with the rules of His determining and decree. He set it in 
order through the  laws of His practices. He adorned and embellished it according to 
the laws of His mercy and favour. He illumined it through the manifestations of His 
names  and  attributes.  All  this  is  testified  to  by  the  order  and  regularity  of  His 
artefacts,  the  adorning  of  His  beings,  and  their  mutual  resemblance  and  harmony, 
their mutual assistance and co-operation, their embracing one another, and  

 

384

the  conscious,  skilful  art  in  all  things  in  accordance  with  the  measure  of  their 
capacities, specified by divine determining. 

The universal wisdom in the order of the universe, 
the perfect favour in its adornment, 
the all-encompassing mercy in the grace bestowed in it, 
the sustenance and provisions nurturing its beings, 
through  its  manifesting  the  essential  attributes  of  its  Creator,  the  wondrous  life 

and art it displays,  

the intended beauties of its embellishment, 
despite its transience, the constant manifestation of reflected beauty within it, 
the true love in its heart for the One it worships, 
the attraction evident in its ecstasy, 
the agreement of all perfected ones in it concerning its Creator’s unity, 
the benefits followed in all its parts, 
its results achieved through wise planning, 
the generous nurturing of its living beings, 
the perfect order in the changes undergone by its chief elements, 
the vast aims followed in the order of its totality, 
its instantaneous creation with utterly perfect art, without need for either time or 

matter, 

the wise individualities given to its beings, hesitant amid limitless possibilities, 
the numerous, various needs of its beings being met at the most appropriate times 
in  unexpected  ways,  together  with  their  smallest  wishes,  which  they  themselves 
cannot answer, 

the absolute strength manifested in its weakness, 
the absolute power manifested in its impotence, 
the life apparent in its lifelessness, 
the encompassing consciousness apparent in its ignorance, 
the perfect order within its changes, necessitating the existence of another who is 

unchanging, 

its glorifications like concentric circles centred on one point, 
the  acceptance  of  its  three  sorts  of  supplications,  offered  through  the  tongue  of 

latent ability, the tongue of innate need, and the tongue of exigency, 
the invocations, and witnessings, and effulgences in its worship, 
the order in its determining, 
the peace found in the remembrance of its Creator, 

 

385

the worship in it being a means of bringing together its beginning and its end, and 
the  cause  of its  perfections  becoming  apparent  and  the  purposes  of  its Maker  being 
realized, 

together  with  these,  all  the  rest  of  the  universe’s  attributes,  states,  and 
circumstances  testify  that  all  its  beings  are  under  the  direction  of  a  Single  Wise 
Planner, and sustained by a Single Munificent Provider; that they are all the servants 
of a Single Master; under the disposal of a Single Disposer, and that their source is the 
power of a Single One the many seals of whose unity are apparent on all the missives 
of all the pages of His beings. 

Yes, all flowers and fruits, and plants and trees, and animals and stones, and even 
particles and clods, in all valleys and on all mountains, and deserts and wildernesses, 
are seals on the inscriptions and the works. To those who look with care, they show 
that whoever fashioned the work, wrote the inscription that comprises the place it  is 
found. He is also the Inscriber of the face of the earth and beneath the seas. He also 
inscribed the sun and the moon on the face of the heavens, which contains many such 
missives. May the glory of their Inscriber be exalted, God is Most Great! 
The world and all in it recite together “There is no god but He!” 

THE FIFTH DEGREE3 

God is Most Great! For He is the All-Powerful Creator, the Giver of Form, All-
Seeing,  proofs  of  whose  divinity  and  tremendousness  are  the  heavenly  bodies  and 
brilliant  glittering  stars;  they  are  rays  testifying  to  His  dominicality  and  splendour. 
They  testify  to  and  proclaim  His  glittering  sovereignty  and  dominicality;  they 
proclaim the vast extent of His rule and His wisdom, and the majestic vastness of His 
power.  

Listen to the verse: 

Do they not lok at the sky above them? How We have made it and adorned it, 
and there are no flaws in it?(50:6) 

Then  look  at  the  face  of  the  heavens,  you  see  how  it  is  silent  in  its  tranquillity,  in 
motion with wisdom, radiant with majesty,  how it smiles with its adornment, within 
the order of its creation, the symmetry of its art. 

The shining of its lamp, the sun, for the changing of the seasons, the stages of its 
candle,  the  moon,  to  illuminate  the  tracks,  the  glittering  of  its  stars  to  adorn  the 
worlds, proclaim to those who think  an  infinite,  unending  sovereignty that regulates 
this world. 

Thus, the All-Powerful Creator is Knowing of all things, His will is all- 

                                                 

3 This is explained and illustrated in the Addendum to the First Stopping-Place of the Thirty-

Second Word and in the Second Station of the Twentieth Word. 

 

386

encompassing;  what  He  wills  is,  and  what  He  does  not  will  is  not.  He  is  Powerful 
over  all  things  through  His  essential,  all-embracing,  absolute  power.  Neither  is  it 
possible  or  imaginable  for  the  sun  today  to  exist  without  light  or  heat,  nor  is  it 
possible  or  imaginable  for  a  god  and  creator  of  the  heavens  to  exist  without  all-
embracing knowledge and absolute power. Of necessity He is Knowing of all things 
with  all-encompassing  knowledge  essential  to  His  being.  Of  necessity  such 
knowledge  is  connected  with  all  things;  by  virtue  of  the  mystery  of  presence, 
witnessing,  penetration,  and  luminous  all-comprehension,  nothing  can  be  separate 
from or outside of such knowledge.  
The  balance  and  order 

the  ordered 
to  be  observed 
proportionateness,  and  universal  wisdom,  and  perfect  bestowal,  and  measured 
regularity, and determined fruitfulness, and the appointed hour of death, and regular 
sustenance,  the  utter  excellence  and  precision  as  established  by  science,  and  the 
solicitous adornment, and the utterly perfect differentiation, balance, order, and skill, 
and the absolute ease, all testify to the all-encompassing  knowledge of the One All-
Knowing of the Unseen and all things. 
As is indicated byt the verse, 

in  beings,  and 

Should He not know – He that created? And He is the One that understands 
the finest mysteries [and] is well-acquainted [with them](67:14) 

the  existence  of  a  thing  necessitates  knowledge,  and  the  light of  existence  of  things 
necessitates the light of knowledge. 

In comparison with the evidence of man’s creation to His  Creator’s knowledge, 
man’s fine art, which points to his intelligence is like the infinitesimal light of a fire-
fly on a dark night in comparison with the splendid brilliance of the noon-day sun on 
the face of the earth. 

And if He is knowing of all things, so He is wills all things. For something cannot 
be  realized  without  being  willed.  And  just  as  power  is  effectual  and  knowledge 
distinguishes, so will specifies; then the existence of things is realized. 

There are evidences to the existence of the divine will and choice to the number 

of states, stages, and attributes of things. 

Yes, all beings being  given order and particular attributes from among  limitless 
possibilities,  amid  fruitless  ways  from  among  confused  floods  of  incongruous 
elements, with such fine and sensitive order, and their being given balance with such 
fine and sensitive balance, as is to be observed; and the creation of the various well-
ordered living beings from simple life 

 

387

less matter – like man and his physical systems from sperm, and birds and their limbs 
from eggs, and trees and their various members from seeds – show that all things are 
specified and determined through His will, choice, and volition. Just as things of the 
same sort corresponding to one another and members of the same species resembling 
each  other  in  regard  to  basic  members  shows  that  of  necessity  their  Maker  is  One, 
Single;  so  too  each  member  having  a  wise  individuality  marked  by  orderly 
distinguishing  features  indicates  that  that  One,  Single  Maker  is  an  Agent  with  Will 
and Choice who acts as He wishes and commands as He wills. 

Just as that All-Knowing and Willing Creator has knowledge of all things and is 
willing of all things, and has all-embracing knowledge and all-encompassing will and 
total  choice;  so  too  He  has  necessary,  essential  perfect  power,  proceeding  from  His 
Essence and necessary to it. The intervention of its opposite is impossible, as all are 
agreed. So there are no degrees in His power. Particles and stars are equal in relation 
to it, as are many and few, small and great, particulars and universals, parts and the 
whole, man and the universe, and the seed and the tree. 

Through the mystery of luminosity, transparency, reciprocity, balance, order, and 

conformity; 

According  to  the  testimony  of  absolute  order,  absolute  balance,  and  absolute 

differentiation, together with absolute speed, ease, and multiplicity; 

Through  the  mystery  of  the  assistance  of  unity,  the  facility  of  unity,  and  the 

manifestation of oneness; 

complete otherness of essence; 

indivisibility; 

Through  the  wisdom  of  necessity,  total  detachment  and  disengagedness,  and 

Through  the  mystery  of  unrestrictedness,  not  being  bound  by  space,  and 

Through  the  wisdom  of  the  transformation  of  obstructions  and  difficulties  into 
means of facilitation – if there were need, though there is none – like veins in human 
beings and metal wires for conducting electricity and subtle forces; 

Through  the  wisdom  of  particles  being  of  no  less  eloquence  than  the  stars,  nor 
particulars of less eloquence than universals, nor parts less than wholes, nor the few 
less than the many, nor the small less than the great, nor man less than the world, nor 
seeds being of less eloquence than the tree;  

According to all these, particles are equal to the stars before that power, few are 
equal to many, small are equal to great, the parts and equal to the whole, particulars 
are equal to universals, man is equal to the world,  

 

388

and the seed equal to the tree; it cannot be deemed unlikely that whoever creates the 
former creates the latter. For the beings that are encompassed are miniature samples 
of the universal, encompassing beings, and like tiny missives, or points distilled from 
them. That is to say, the thing that is encompassed has to be in the grasp of power of 
the  Creator  of  the  encompassing  being  so  that  the  miniature  sample  of  the 
encompassing  being  may  be  contained  within  the  encompassed  thing  through  the 
principles  of  His  knowledge,  and  the  summary  of  the  encompassing  being  may  be 
pressed out of it in accordance with the balance of His wisdom. 

A  Qur’an  of  Wisdom  written  on  an  atom  in  particles  of  ether  is  of  no  less 
eloquence than a Qur’an of Grandeur written on the pages of the heavens with the ink 
of the sun and stars. Similarly, the creation of a bee or an ant is of no less eloquence 
than  the  creation  of  a  date-palm  or  an  elephant,  and  the  art  in  a  rose  is  of  no  less 
eloquence than a shining star. And so on, further examples may be made in the same 
way. 

Furthermore,  the  complete  ease  in  the  creation  of  things  has  led  the  people  of 
misguidance  to  confuse  the  formation  of  things  with  self-formation,  which 
necessitates  superstitious  impossibilities  that  not  only  the  reason  rejects,  but  from 
which even  fancy  flees in disgust, while  for the people of truth and reality it proves 
certainly  and  necessarily  that  before  the  power  of  the  Creator  of  the  universe,  stars 
and particles are equal. 

May His glory be exalted and name be magnified; there is no god but He! 

THE SIXTH DEGREE4 

May His glory be exalted and sublimity extolled, God is Most Great! In regard to 
power and knowledge He is greater than all things. For He is All-Just, All-Wise, All-
Powerful,  All-Knowing,  One,  Single,  the  Pre-Eternal  Sovereign.  All  the  worlds  are 
within the grasp of His order and balance, and ordering and balancing; of His justice, 
and  wisdom,  and  knowledge,  and  power,  and  under  their  sway.  They  manifest  His 
unity and oneness, as may be surmised certainly, indeed, may be observed. For there 
is  nothing  in  existence  which  is  outside  the  bounds  of  the  order  and  balance  and 
ordering and balancing. They are the two domains of the Clear Record and the Clear 
Book.  These  are  two  titles,  the  former  of  the  knowledge  and  command  of  the  All-
Knowing and Wise One, the latter of the power and will of  

                                                 

4 If this sixth degree had been written similarly to the other degrees, it would have been extremely 
lengthy, for the Clear Book and the Clear Record cannot be explained in concise terms. However, there 
is a brief discussion of it in the Thirtieth Word, so we have cut short the discussion here, and left 
detailed explanation of it to the study session [ders]. 

 

389

that Mighty and All-Compassionate One. For the order and balance in this Book and 
Record are two shining proofs for people of reason who have two eyes in their head, 
that  nothing  at  all  in  existence  and  time  is  outside  the  grasp  of  power  of  a  Most 
Merciful One, the ordering of One Most Kind, the adorning of One Most Clement, the 
balancing of a Requiter. 

I n  S h o r t : The manifestations of the names of First and Last in creation look 
to the beginnings and ends of beings, and their origin and progeny, and the past and 
the future, and to the divine command and knowledge; they point to the Clear Record. 
While the manifestation of the names of Outward and Inward in the creation of things 
indicate the Clear Book. 

For the universe is like a vast tree, and all the worlds within it also are like trees. 
You may therefore draw a comparison between the creation of a single tree and that 
of  the  universe  together  with  all  its  worlds  and  realms.  The  tree  has  an  origin  and 
source, which is the seed from which it sprang, and it has a progeny which continues 
its functions after its death, which is the seed in its fruit. 

Thus its beginning and end are the manifestations of the names of First and Last. 
Through order and wisdom, its beginning and original seed are an index and timetable 
comprising all the  laws of the tree’s  formation. The  seeds  in  its  fruits, which are  its 
end, are the place of manifestation of the name of Last. 

The seeds in its fruit created with perfect wisdom are like small coffers in which 
have been placed an index and timetable for the formation of a similar tree. Inscribed 
in  them  with  the  pen  of  divine  determining  are  the  laws  of  the  formation  of  future 
trees. 

The tree’s outer aspect is the manifestation of the name of Outward. For its outer 
appearance  displays  perfect  order  and  balancing  and  wisdom,  like  an  ornate  and 
decorated  garment  with  which  the  tree  has  been  clothed  with  perfect  wisdom  and 
grace in accordance with the measure of its stature. 

The  tree’s  inner  aspect  is  the  manifestation  of  the  name  of  Inward.  It  displays 
perfect order and planning and astounds minds. It distributes the substances necessary 
for the tree’s life to its various members with complete regularity, as though this inner 
aspect were a wondrous machine working with the utmost orderly balance. 

Thus,  its  origin  is  a  wondrous  timetable  and  its  end  an  astonishing  index,  both 
indicating the Clear Record. While its outer aspect is a gorgeous robe full of art, and 
its inner aspect, a machine of the utmost regularity; both pointing to the Clear Book. 

Just as man’s faculty of memory points to the Preserved Tablet and is a proof it, 

so the original seeds of trees and their fruits point to the Clear  

 

390

Record.  While  their  outer  and  inner  aspects  allude  to  the  Clear  Book.  Comparisons 
may therefore be drawn between this particular tree and the tree of the earth and its 
past and its future, and the tree of the universe and its beginnings and its future, and 
the tree of man and his forebears and progeny. And so on. 

May their Creator’s glory be exalted, there is no god but He! 
Oh One Sublime! You guide not the mind to the true essence of Your grandeur 
nor lead it to the substance of Your tremendousness, for it is powerless to comprehend 
them! 

THE SEVENTH DEGREE  

God is Most Great, may His glory be exalted! In respect of power and knowlege 
He  is  greater  than  all  things.  For  He  is  the  Creator,5  the  Opener,  the  Doer,  Most 
Knowing, the  Bestower, Most Effulgent, the Pre-Eternal Sun. The universe together 
with its realms and beings is a shadow thrown by His lights; they are the works of His 
acts, and the colours of the impresses of the various manifestations of His names, and 
the  lines  inscribed  by  the  pen  of  His  determining  and  decree,  and  mirrors  to  the 
manifestations of His attributes, beauty, glory, and perfection. 

According  to  the  consensus  of  the  Pre-Eternal  Witness,  known  through  all  His 

Books and Scriptures, and His Qur’anic verses, and creational signs; 

And  the  consensus  of  the  earth  with  all  its  worlds,  together  with  their  total 

essential want and need, and the absolute wealth and riches displayed on them; 

And the consensus of all the prophets, saints, and purified scholars, the people of 
witnessing with luminous spirits, light-filled hearts, and illumined minds, through all 
their researches, uncoverings, effulgences, and invocations; 

All  from  the  earth  to  the  lofty  and  lowly  bodies  with  their  endless  certain 
testimony  and certain affirmation, agree  in accepting the testimony of the creational 
signs and Qur’anic verses, and the revealed Books and Scriptures, the very testimony 
of  the  Necessary  Existent  One,  that  all  beings  are  the  works  of  His  power,  the 
missives of His determining, the mirrors to His names, and the representations of His 
Lights. 

May His glory be exalted, there is no god but He! 
 
 

                                                 

5 If one looks through the telescopes of these divine names at the divine acts and works beneath 

their manifestations in beings, the mind is transposed to the Glorious One whom the names signify. 

 

 

391

The Thirtieth Flash 

This, the Thirtieth Flash of the Thirty-First Letter 
and a fruit of Eskişehir Prison, consists of six points 

 [Just  as  Meyve  Risalesi  (The  Fruits  of  Belief)  was  the 
supreme  lesson  of  the  Denizli  School  of  Joseph,  and  El-
Hüccetü’z-Zehrâ  (The  Shining  Proof)  was  a  most  valuable 
lesson  of  the  Afyon  School  of  Joseph,  so  too  this  Thirtieth 
Flash,  which  expounds  six points  about  the  six  divine  names 
bearing  the  greatest  name  was  a  powerful  lesson  of  the 
greatest importance of the Eskişehir School of Joseph. 

Everyone  will  not  immediately  understand  and  appreciate 
the profound, extensive matters in the pieces about the names 
of  Ever-Living  and  Self-Subsistent  from  the  greatest  name, 
but they will not remain without a share of them either.] 

THE FIRST POINT 
The Divine Name Most Holy 

 [This  point  concerns  one  aspect  of the  divine  name  of  Most 
Holy. It is appropriate that it should form an addendum to the 
Addendum of the Thirtieth Word.] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
And  the  earth  We  have  spread  wide;  and  how  well  have  We  ordered 
it.(51:48) 

One  manifestation  of  the  divine  name  Most  Holy,  which  is  one  meaning  of the 
above  verse  and is a  greatest  name or one of the  six  lights contained  in the  greatest 
name,  became  clear  to  me  in  the  month  of  Sha‘ban  in  Eskişehir  Prison.  It 
demonstrated with complete clarity both the divine existence and divine unity. I saw it 
as follows: 

 

392

The  universe  is  a  vast,  constantly  working  factory  and  the  globe  of  the  earth  a 
hostel  and  guesthouse  which  is  continually  filled  and  emptied.  Generally,  factories, 
hostels  and  guesthouses  which  are  thus  used  become  much  dirtied  and  soiled  with 
filth,  debris  and  rubbish,  and  putrid  matter  accumulates  in  all  parts  of  them.  They 
cannot  be  occupied  unless  they  are  kept  with  care  and  cleaned  and  swept;  human 
beings are overwhelmed by the dirt. The factory of the universe and guesthouse of the 
earth,  however,  are  totally  pure,  clean  and  spotless,  and  completely  unsoiled, 
untainted  and  fresh;  there  is  nothing  unnecessary,  nothing  without  benefit,  not  a 
random piece of dirt to be found. Even if there is apparently, it is quickly thrown into 
a transformation machine and cleaned. 

This means that the One who looks after this factory does so very well. Its Owner 
is such that He sweeps and cleans and orders the vast factory and extensive palace as 
though they were small rooms. Considering the size of the  huge  factory, there  is  no 
dirt or rubbish remaining  from its filth and debris. Indeed, its cleanness and tidiness 
are remarkable. 

If  someone  does  not  wash  himself  and  clean  his  small  room  for  a  month,  they 
will  become  extremely  dirty  and  soiled.  That  is  to  say,  the  cleanliness,  purity,  and 
luminosity  in  this  palace  of  the  world  arise  from  a  continuous,  wise,  and  diligent 
cleaning. If it were not for this cleaning, sweeping and careful tending, in one year all 
the hundred thousand animal species would have been choked on the face of the earth. 
Also, the debris of the globes in space and the heavens, which manifest life and 
death, and of satellites and stars, would have smashed not only our heads and those of 
the other animals, but also the head of the earth itself and of our world. They would 
have rained down on our heads rocks the size of mountains and driven us away from 
our  homeland  in  this  world.  However,  for  a  long  time  past,  if  as  a  warning  a  few 
meteorites  have  fallen  as  a  result  of  destruction  and  reconstruction  in  those  lofty 
worlds, they have not broken any heads. 

Furthermore, the corpses of a hundred thousand animal species and the debris of 
two hundred thousand plant species each  year on the face of the earth resulting from 
the alternation and struggles of life and death would have so utterly filthied the land 
and the  sea that conscious creatures, rather than  loving and delighting in the  face of 
the earth, would have felt disgust and aversion at such ugliness and fled to death and 
non-existence. 

Just as a bird cleans its wings with ease and a scribe his pages, so too the wings 
of the aircraft of the earth and the birds of the heavenly bodies and the pages of the 
book of the universe are cleaned and made beautiful. So much so that people who do 
not consider the infinite beauty of the hereafter  

 

393

and think with belief become lovers of this cleanliness and beauty of the world, they 
worship it. 

That  is  to  say,  this  palace  of  the  world  and  factory  of  the  universe  display  a 
greatest  manifestation  of  the  divine  name  Most  Holy  whereby  it  is  not  only  the 
carniverous cleaners of the seas and the eagles of the land which obey the commands 
proceeding from that sacred cleansing, but also its cleansing officials which gather up 
corpses, like worms and ants. Like the red and white blood-corpuscles flowing in the 
body  obey  those  sacred  commands  and  do  the  cleaning  in the  body’s  cells,  so  does 
breathing purify and clean the blood. 

And as eyelids obey the command to clean the eye and flies to brush their wings, 
so the extensive atmosphere and the clouds obey it. The air blows upon the pieces of 
dust  and  soil  settled  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  and  cleans  it.  The  sponges  of  the 
clouds sprinkle water on the garden of the earth and dampen the dust and soil. Then, 
so as  not to dirty the sky, the  air quickly  collects the earth’s rubbish and withdraws 
and hides itself with perfect orderliness. It displays the beautiful face and eye of the 
skies as swept and polished, all sparkling and shining. 

And as the  stars, elements, minerals, and plants obey the command to clean, all 
particles  and  atoms  obey  it:  they  pay  attention  to  cleanliness  within  the  astonishing 
upheavals  of  change  and 
transformation.  They  never  congregate  anywhere 
unnecessarily and get in the way. If they do become soiled, they are quickly cleaned. 
They  are  impelled  by  a  hand  of  wisdom  to  acquire  the  cleanest,  neatest,  and  most 
shining states and the most beautiful, pure and subtle forms.  

Thus, this single  act, that  is, making clean, which  is a single truth, is a  greatest 
manifestation of a  greatest  name, the  name of Most Holy, which  shows itself  in the 
maximum sphere, that  is, throughout the universe. Like the sun, it shows directly to 
eyes that are far-seeing and broad-sighted the divine existence and unity together with 
the most beautiful divine names. 

It has been established with decisive proofs in many parts of the Risale-i Nur that 
the act of ordering and order, which are a manifestation of the names of Sapient and 
All-Wise;  and  the  act  of  weighing  and  balance,  which  are  a  manifestation  of  the 
names of Justice and All-Just; and the act of adorning and munificence, which are a 
manifestation of the names of Beauteous and All-Generous; and the act of sustaining 
and  bestowal,  which  are  a  manifestation  of  the  names  of  Sustainer  and  Most 
Compassionate are each a single truth and a single act, they therefore demonstrate the 
necessary existence and unity of a Single Being. In exactly the same way, the act of 
purifying and making clean, which is a manifestation and display of the  

 

394

name  Most  Holy,  demonstrates  like  the  sun  both  the  existence  of  the  Necessarily 
Existent One, and like daylight, His unity. 

And  as  the  wise  acts  of  ordering,  balancing,  adorning  and  making  clean 
mentioned  above  point  to  a  Single  Maker  by  reason  of  their  unity  of  kind  in  the 
maximum  sphere,  so  most  of  the  beautiful  names,  indeed,  the  thousand  and  one 
names, each have such a greatest manifestation in the maximum sphere. And the act 
proceeding from that manifestation points to the Single Unique One with clarity and 
decisiveness in relation to its extensiveness. 

The self-evident truths and single acts that illuminate the face of the universe and 
make  it  smile,  such  as  the  universal  wisdom that  causes  all  things  to  conform to  its 
law and order, the comprehensive munificence that adorns all things and causes them 
to  smile,  the  all-embracing  mercy  that  makes  all  things  pleased  and  happy,  the 
universal providing of sustenance which nurtures and gives pleasure to all things, and 
the  life and giving of life which connects each thing with all things and makes each 
thing benefit from, and to some extent own, all things – these self-evident truths and 
single  acts  point  as  plainly  as  light  points  to  the  sun  to  a  single  All-Wise,  All-
Generous, and All-Compassionate One, a single Sustainer, a single Ever-Living Giver 
of Life. 

If those hundreds of extensive acts, each of which is a clear proof of God’s unity, 
are not attributed to the Single Unique One, each necessarily becomes impossible in 
hundreds  of  respects.  For  example,  let  alone  such  self-evident  truths  and  single 
evidences as wisdom, providence, mercy, sustaining and giving of life, if only the act 
of  making  clean  is  not  attributed  to  the  Creator  of  the  universe,  then  the  following 
becomes necessary in the unbelieving way of the people of misguidance: 

Either  all  the  creatures  connected  to  cleansing  from  particles  and  flies  to  the 
elements  and  the  stars  would  have  to  have  the  ability  to  know  and  consider  the 
adorning, balancing, and cleansing of the vast universe and would act accordingly, or 
each would have to possess the sacred attributes of the world’s Creator, or each would 
have  to  be  present  at  a  consultative  meeting  the  size  of  the  universe  in  order  to 
regulate  the  equilibrium  of  the  adorning  and  cleansing  of  the  universe  and  its 
incomings and outgoings, and innumerable particles, flies, and stars would have to be 
participants  in  the  meeting;  and  so  on.  Hundreds  of  superstitious,  nonsensical  and 
sophistical  impossibilities  like  these  would  have  to  occur  so  that  the  universal, 
comprehensive, and exalted adorning, purifying and cleansing that  is to be seen  and 
observed everywhere could come about. As for this,  it  is  not impossible once, but a 
hundred thousand times over. 

If daylight and the imaginary miniature suns represented in the shining  

395

objects  on  the  earth  are  not  attributed  to  the  sun  and  they  are  not  said  to  be  the 
manifestation  of  the  sun’s  reflection,  it  would be  necessary  for  the  actual  sun  to  be 
present  in  all  fragments  of  glass,  drops  of  water  and  snow-flakes  glistening  on  the 
face of the earth, and even in all particles of air, so that the universal light could exist. 
Thus,  wisdom  is  a  light;  all-embracing  mercy  is  a  light;  adorning,  balancing, 
ordering,  and  cleansing  are  each an  encompassing  light:  they  are  all  the  rays  of  the 
Pre-Eternal  Sun.  So  see  how  misguidance  and  unbelief  have  entered  a  bog  from 
which there is no escape! See just how idiotic is the ignorance of misguidance! Say: 
“Praise be to God for the religion of Islam and complete and perfect belief!” 

For sure, this exalted, universal cleansing which keeps the palace of the universe 
clean is the manifestation and requirement of the divine name Most Holy. Yes, just as 
the  glorification  of  all  creatures  looks  to  the  name  Most  Holy,  so  does  the  name  of 
Most Holy require their cleanliness.1 

 It  is  because  of  this  sacred  connection  of  cleanliness  that  the  Hadith, 

“Cleanliness is a part of belief”2 deems it to be a light of belief. And the verse, 

Indeed, God loves those who turn to Him constantly and He loves those who 
keep themselves pure and clean(2:222) 

shows that cleanliness is a means of attracting God’s love. 

 

 

 
 
 

                                                 

and spiritual dirt. 

1 We must not forget that bad qualities, false beliefs, sins and innovation are all instances of moral 

2 Muslim, Tahara, 1; Darimi, Vudu’, 2; Musnad, v, 342, 344; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, 291. 

 

396

THE SECOND POINT 
The Divine Name All-Just 

And there is not a thing but its [sources and] treasures [inexhaustible] are 
with  Us;  but  We  only  send  down  thereof  in  due  and  ascertainable 
measures.(15:21) 

One  point  concerning  this  verse  and  one  manifestation  of  the  name  All-Just, 
which is a greatest name or one of the six lights comprising the Greatest Name, like 
the First Point, appeared to me from afar while in Eskişehir Prison. In order to bring it 
closer to the understanding, we say the following; again by means of a comparison: 

The universe is a palace, but it is such a palace that within it is a city that suffers 
the upheavals of constant destruction and reconstruction. Within the city is a country 
that  is  being  continuously  agitated  by  war  and  emigration.  Within  the  country  is  a 
world  which  is  unceasingly  revolving  amid  death  and  life.  But  such  an  astonishing 
balance,  equilibrium and  equilibration  prevail  in  the  palace,  city, country  and  world 
that  it  self-evidently  proves  that  the  transformations,  and  incomings  and  outgoings 
apparent in their innumerable beings are being measured and weighed every moment 
on the scales of a Single Being who sees and supervises the whole universe. 

For if it had been otherwise, if causes had been free and unrestrained, which try 
to  destroy  the  balance  and  overrun  everything,  with  a  single  fish  laying  a  thousand 
eggs  and  a  single  flower  like  the  poppy  producing  twenty  thousand  seeds, and  with 
the onslaught and violence of change and the elements flowing in floods, or if it had 
been referred to aimless, purposeless chance, anarchic blind forces, and unconscious 
dark nature, the equilibrium of beings and balance of the universe would have been so 
utterly  destroyed  that  within  a  year,  indeed  within  a  day,  there  would  have  been 
chaos. That is to say, the seas would have been filled with wreckage in total disorder 
and  confusion  and  would  have  become  fetid;  the  atmosphere  would  have  been 
poisoned with noxious gases; and as for the earth, it would have turned into a refuse-
heap, slaughter-house, and swamp. The world would have suffocated. 

Thus, everything from the cells of an animate body, the red and white corpuscles 

in the blood, the transformations of minute particles, and the  

 

397

mutual proportion and relation of the body’s organs, to the incomings and outgoings 
of the seas, the income and expenditure of springs under the earth, the birth and death 
of animals and plants, the destruction of autumn and the reconstruction of spring, the 
duties  and  motion  of  the  elements  and  the  stars,  and  the  alternations,  struggles  and 
clashes  of  death  and  life,  light  and  darkness,  and  heat  and  cold,  are  ordered  and 
weighed  with  so  sensitive  a  balance,  so  fine  a  measure,  that  the  human  mind  can 
nowhere  see  any  waste  or  futility,  just  as  human  science  and  philosophy  observe 
everywhere and demonstrate the most perfect order and beautiful symmetry. Indeed, 
human  science  and  philosophy  are  a  manifestation  and  interpreter  of  that  order  and 
symmetry.  

So,  come  and  consider  the  balance  and  equilibrium  of  the  sun  and  its  twelve 
planets. Does it not point as clearly as the sun to the All-Glorious One who is All-Just 
and All-Powerful? Especially our ship, that is, the globe of the earth, which is one of 
the planets; it travels an orbit of twenty-four thousand years in one year, not scattering 
or shaking the things stored up and stacked on its face, despite its extraordinary speed, 
nor  throwing  them  off  into  space.  If  its  speed  had  been  increased  or  reduced  just  a 
little, it would have thrown its inhabitants off into the atmosphere, and scattered them 
through space. And if its balance was to be destroyed for a minute, or even a second, 
it would destroy the world. Indeed, it would clash with another body and doomsday 
would break forth. 

Especially  the  compassionate  balance  on  the  face  of  the  earth  of  the  births, 
deaths, livelihoods, and lives of the four hundred thousand plant and animal species; it 
shows a single Just and Compassionate One, as clearly as light shows the sun. 

Especially  the  members,  faculties,  and  senses  of  a  single  of  the  innumerable 
members of  those species;  they  are  related  to  each  other  with  so fine  a  balance  and 
equilibrium  that  their  balance  and  mutual  proportion  show  an  All-Wise  and  Just 
Maker so clearly as to be self-evident. 

Especially the cells and blood-vessels in the bodies of animals, and the corpuscles 
in  the  blood  and  particles  in  the  corpuscles;  they  have  such  a  fine,  sensitive,  and 
wondrous  balance  that  it  self-evidently  proves  that  they  are  being  nurtured  and 
administered  through  the  balance,  law,  and  order  of  a  single  All-Just  and  Wise 
Creator who holds the reins of all things, has the key to all things, for whom nothing 
is an obstacle to anything else, and directs all things as easily as a single thing. 

If someone who does not believe or deems it unlikely that the deeds of jinn and 
men will be weighed up on the supreme scales of justice at the Last Judgement notes 
carefully this vast balance, which he can observe in  

 

398

this world with his own eyes, he will surely no longer consider it unlikely. 

O wasteful, prodigal.. wrongful, unjust.. dirty, unclean.. wretched man! You have 
not  acted  in  accordance  with  the  economy,  cleanliness,  and  justice  that  are  the 
principles by which the whole universe and all beings act, and are therefore in effect 
the  object  of  their  anger  and  disgust.  On  what  do  you  rely  that  through  your 
wrongdoing  and  disequilibrium,  your  wastefulness  and  uncleanliness,  you  make  all 
beings  angry?  Yes,  the  universal  wisdom  of  the  universe,  which  is  the  greatest 
manifestation of the divine name of All-Wise, turns on economy and lack of waste. It 
commands frugality. And the total justice in the universe proceeding from the greatest 
manifestation of the Name All-Just, administers the balance of all things and enjoins 
justice  on  man.  Mentioning  the  word  balance  four  times,  the  verses  in  Sura  al-
Rahman, 

And  the  firmament  has  He  raised  high,  and  He  has  set  up  the  balance  [of 
justice], * In order that you may not transgress [due] balance. * So establish 
weight with justice and fall not short in the balance,(35:7-9) 

indicate four degrees  and four sorts of balance, showing  its  immensity  and supreme 
importance  in  the  universe.  Yes,  just  as  there  is  no  wastefulness  in  anything,  so  in 
nothing is there true injustice or imbalance. 

The cleanliness and purification proceeding from the name Most Holy cleans and 
makes beautiful all the beings in the universe. So long as man’s dirty  hand does not 
interfere, there is no true uncleanliness or ugliness in anything. 

So  you  may  understand  how  basic  to  human  life  are  the  principles  of  justice, 
frugality, and cleanliness, which are truths of the Qur’an and Islamic principles. And 
know  how  closely  connected  with  the  universe  are  the  injunctions  of  the  Qur’an, 
having spread their firm roots everywhere, and that it is as impossible to destroy those 
truths as it is to destroy the universe and change its form. 

Is  it  at  all  possible  that  although  hundreds  of  comprehensive  truths  like  these 
three  vast  lights,  such  as  mercy,  grace, and  preservation, require  and necessitate  the 
resurrection of the dead and the hereafter, such powerful and all-encompassing truths 
as  mercy,  favour,  justice,  wisdom,  frugality,  and  cleanliness,  which  govern  in  the 
universe  and  all  beings,  should  be  transformed  into  unkindness,  tyranny,  lack  of 
wisdom, wastefulness, uncleanliness, and futility, by there being no hereafter and the 
resurrection not occurring? 

God forbid, a hundred thousand times, God forbid! Would a mercy and  

 

399

wisdom  which  compassionately  preserve  the  rights  of  life  of  a  fly  violate  the 
countless  rights  of  life  of  all  conscious  beings  and  the  numberless  rights  of 
numberless  beings,  by  not  bringing  about  the  resurrection?  And  if  one  may  say  so, 
would a splendid dominicality which displays infinite sensitivity and care in its mercy 
and compassion and justice and wisdom, and a divine  sovereignty  which adorns the 
universe  with  His  endless  wondrous  arts  and  bounties  in  order  to  display  His 
perfections  and  make  himself  known  and  loved,  permit  there  to  be  no  resurrection, 
which  would reduce  to  nothing  the  value  of  creatures  and  all  their  perfections,  and 
make  them  denied?  God  forbid!  Such  an  absolute  beauty  clearly  would  not  permit 
such absolute ugliness. 

Yes, the person who wants to deny the hereafter must first deny all the world and 
all its truths. Otherwise the world together with all its truths will give him the lie with 
a  hundred  thousand  tongues,  proving  the  compounded  nature  of  his  lie.  The  Tenth 
Word proves  with  certain  evidences  that  the  existence  of  the  hereafter  is  as  definite 
and indubitable as the existence of this world. 

 

 

400

THE THIRD POINT 
Which alludes to the Third of the Six Lights 
of the Greatest Name, 
The Divine Name Sapient 

Invite [all] to the way of your Sustainer with wisdom.(16:125) 

[One  manifestation  of  the  divine  name  Sapient,  which  is  a 
greatest name or one of the six lights of the greatest name, and 
a fine point of the above verse, appeared to me in the month of 
Ramadan while in Eskişehir Prison. This Third Point consists 
of five matters, and forms only an allusion to it. It was written 
in haste and has remained in its original form.] 

FIRST MATTER 

As is indicated in the Tenth Word, the greatest manifestation of the divine name 
of  Sapient  has  made  the  universe  like  a  book  in  every  page  of  which  hundreds  of 
books  have  been  written,  and  in  every  line  of  which  hundreds  of  pages  have  been 
included,  and  in  every  word  of  which  are  hundreds  of  lines,  and  in  each  letter  of 
which are a hundred words, and in every point of which is found a short index of the 
book.  The  book’s  pages  and  lines  down  to  the  very  points  show  its  Inscriber  and 
Writer  with  such  clarity  that  that  book  of  the  universe  testifies  to  and  proves  the 
existence  and  unity  of  its  Scribe  to  a  degree  far  greater  than  it  shows  its  own 
existence.  For  if  a  single  letter  shows  its  own  existence  to  the  extent  of  a  letter,  it 
shows its Scribe to the extent of a line. 

Yes, one page of this mighty book is the face of the earth. Books to the number of 
the plant and animal species are to be observed on this page in the spring, one within 
the other, together, at the same time, without error, in the most perfect form. 

A  single  line  of  the  page  is  a  garden.  We  see  that  written  on  this  line  are  well-
composed odes to the number of flowers, trees, and animals, together, one within the 
other, without error. 

One  word  of  the  line  is  a  tree  which  has  opened  its  blossom  and  put  forth  its 
leaves in order to produce its fruit. This word consists of meaningful passages lauding 
and  praising  the  All-Glorious  Sapient  One  to  the  number  of  orderly,  well-
proportioned, adorned leaves, flowers, and fruits. It is  

 

401

as  though  like  all  trees,  this  tree  is  a  well-composed  ode  singing  the  praises  of  its 
Inscriber. 

It is also as if the All-Glorious Sapient One wants to look with thousands of eyes 

on His wonderful antique works displayed in the exhibition of the earth. 

And it is as if the bejewelled gifts, decorations and uniforms given to the tree by 
that Pre-Eternal Monarch have been given such adorned, well-proportioned, orderly, 
meaningful  and  wise  forms  in  order  to  present  them  to  His  view  in  the  spring,  its 
particular festival and parade, that each of its flowers and fruits testifies in numerous 
ways  and  with  many  evidences  one  within  the  other  to  its  Inscriber’s  existence  and 
Names. 

For example, in all its blossoms and fruits is a balance. The balance is within an 
order,  and  the  order  is  within  an  ordering  and  balancing  which  is  being  constantly 
renewed.  The  ordering  and  balancing  is  within  an  art  and  adornment,  and  the 
adornment  and  art  are  within  meaningful  scents  and  wise  tastes.  Thus,  each  flower 
points to the All-Glorious Sapient One to the number of the tree’s blossoms. 

And  in  the  tree, which  is  a  word, the  point  of  a  seed  in  a  fruit,  which  is  like  a 
letter, is a small coffer containing the index and programme of the whole tree. And so 
on. To continue the same analogy, through the manifestation of the name of Sapient 
and Wise, all the lines and pages of the book of the universe – and not only its lines, 
but all its words, letters, and points – have been made as miracles so that if all causes 
were to gather together, they could not make the like of a single point, nor could they 
dispute it. 

Yes,  since  each  of  the  creational  signs  of  this  mighty  Qur’an  of  the  universe 
displays miracles to the number of points and letters of those signs, in no way could 
confused  chance,  blind  force,  aimless,  anarchic,  unconscious nature  interfere  in  that 
wise,  percipient  particular  balance  and  most  sensitive  order.  If  they  had  interfered, 
some traces of confusion would certainly have been apparent. Whereas no disorder of 
any sort is to be seen anywhere. 

SECOND MATTER 

F i r s t  T o p i c : As is explained in the Tenth Word, it is a fundamental rule 
that  infinitely  perfect  beauty  and  infinitely  beautiful  perfection  want  to  behold 
themselves and show and exhibit themselves. In consequence of this, in order to make 
Himself  and  His  perfections  known,  and  to  display  His  beauty  and  make  Himself 
loved the Pre-Eternal Inscriber of the mighty book of the universe makes known and 
loved the beauty of His perfection and perfection of His beauty with the universe and 
all its pages,  

 

402

lines and even letters and points, with the innumerable tongues of all beings from the 
most particular to the most universal. 

O heedless man! Come to your senses! Know just what a compounded ignorance 
it  is  and  what  a  loss  if  in  the  face  of  the  Sapient  and  All-Wise  Ruler  of  Glory  and 
Beauty’s  making  Himself  known  to  you  and  loved  by  you  by  means  of  all  His 
creatures in this brilliant, endless  fashion  you do not recognize  Him with belief  and 
you do not make yourself loved by Him with your worship. 

T  h  e    S  e  c  o  n  d    T  o  p  i  c  of  the  Second  Matter:  There  is  no  place  for 
partnership in the dominions of the universe’s All-Powerful and Wise Maker. For the 
infinitely  perfect  order  present  in  everything  does  not  accept  partners.  Many  hands 
intervening  in  a  single  matter  confuses  it.  If  there  are  two  kings  in  a  country,  two 
governors  of  a  town,  or  two  headmen  in  a  village,  disorder  will  occur  in  all  their 
affairs. Similarly, the lowest official does not accept interference in his duties, which 
shows that the fundamental characteristic of rulership is independence and singleness. 
That is to say, order necessitates unity, and rulership necessitates independence. 

If a temporary shadow of rulership in impotent man needy for assistance rejects 
interference  in this way, the true, absolute rulership at the degree of dominicality of 
the  One  who  possesses  absolute  power  will  certainly  reject  interference  with  all  its 
strength. Even the tiniest interference would spoil the order. 

However, the universe  has been created in  such a way that to create a seed, the 
power  to  create  a  tree  is  necessary.  And  to  create  a  tree,  the  power  to  create  the 
universe is necessary. If any partner interfered in the universe, he would have to share 
in the tiniest seed. For the seed is a sample of the universe. So then two dominicalities 
which cannot reside together in the vast universe, would have to reside in a seed, and 
even  in  a  minute  particle.  This  is  the  most  precluded  and  meaningless  of 
impossibilities and false delusions. Know that unbelief and associating partners with 
God  are  an  infinitely  compounded  contradiction,  error,  and  falsehood,  for  they 
necessitate the impotence – even if only in a seed – of the Absolutely Powerful One 
who  holds  in  the  balance  of  His  justice  and  order  of  His  wisdom  all  the  states  and 
attributes of the vast universe; and know that divine unity is an infinitely compounded 
truth, reality and verity, and say: “All praise and thanks be to God for belief!”  

 

403

THIRD MATTER 

With  His  names  Sapient  and  All-Wise,  the  All-Powerful  Maker  has  included 
thousands of well-ordered worlds in this world. Within those worlds, He created man 
as a centre and pivot who of all creatures manifests the wisdom and purposes in the 
universe. The most important of the instances of wisdom and beneficial things in the 
sphere of the universe look to man. And in the human sphere, He made sustenance a 
centre;  in  the  human  world  most  of  the  instances  of  wisdom  and  benefits  look  to 
sustenance and are manifest through it. The manifestation of the name of All-Wise is 
apparent in brilliant form in man through his intelligence and the pleasure he receives 
from  sustenance.  Each  one  of  the  hundreds  of  sciences  discovered  by  human 
intelligence describes a manifestation of the name of Sapient in a realm of creation. 

For  example,  if  the  science  of  medicine  were  to  be  asked:  “What  is  the 
universe?”, it would be bound to reply: “It is an exceedingly vast, orderly and perfect 
pharmacy. All remedies are prepared and stored up in it in the best way.” 

If the science of chemistry were asked: “What is the earth?”, it would reply: “It is 

a perfectly ordered chemist’s shop.” 

The science of engineering would reply: “It is totally faultless, perfect factory.” 
The science of agriculture would reply: “It is an infinitely productive, regular and 
well-laid-out field and garden which produces all kinds of seeds at the required time.” 
The  science  of  commerce  would  reply:  “It  is  an  extremely  well-set-out 

exhibition, orderly market, and shop stocked with most artistic wares.” 

The  science  of  economics  would  reply:  “It  is  an  exceedingly  well-arranged 

warehouse containing every sort and kind of food.” 

The science of dietetics would reply: “It  is a dominical  kitchen and cauldron of 
the Most Merciful in which are cooked most regularly hundreds of thousands of the 
most delicious foods.” 

The  science of soldiering would reply: “The earth  is a military  camp. Although 
there  are  four  hundred  thousand  different  nations  in  that  army,  newly  taken  under 
arms  with  their  tents  pitched  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  they  are  given  their  rations, 
uniforms,  weapons,  training,  and  discharges,  which  are  different  for  each  nation,  in 
perfect  order,  with  no  confusion  and  none  being  forgotten,  through  the  command, 
power, compassion of a single  Commander-in-Chief, from His treasury; they  are all 
administered in the most regular fashion.” 

 

404

And if the science of electricity were to be asked: “What is this world?”, it would 
certainly reply: “The roof of this magnificent palace of the universe has been adorned 
with innumerable orderly and balanced electric lamps, and the order and balance are 
so  wondrous  that  foremost  the  sun,  and  those  heavenly  lamps  which  are  a  thousand 
times  larger  than  the  earth,  do  not  spoil  their  balance,  although  they  burn 
continuously; they do not explode or burst into flames. Their expenditure is endless, 
so  where  do  their  income  and  fuel  and  combustible  material  come  from?  Why  are 
they  not exhausted? Why  is the balance not spoilt with their burning? A  small  lamp 
goes out if it is not tended regularly. See the wisdom and power of the All-Wise One 
of Glory, who makes the sun, which according to astronomy is a million times larger 
than  the  earth  and  a  million  years  older,1  burn  without  coal  or  oil,  without  being 
extinguished;  say:  ‘All  Glory  be  to  God!’  Say:  ‘What  wonders  God  has  willed! 
Blessed  be  God!  There  is  no  god  but  He!’  to  the  number  of  seconds  of  the  sun’s 
existence. 

“This  means  there  is  a  wondrous  order  in  these  heavenly  lamps,  and  they  are 
tended  with  the  greatest  care.  It  is  as  if  the  boiler  of  those  huge,  numerous  fiery 
masses,  those  light-shedding  lamps,  is  a  Hell  whose  heat  is  never  exhausted;  it 
provides  them  with  lightless  heat.  While  the  machinery  and central  factory  of  those 
electric  lamps  is  a  perpetual  Paradise;  it  provides  them  with  light  and  luminosity; 
through  the  greatest  manifestation  of  the  names  of  Sapient  and  All-Wise,  they 
continue to burn in orderly fashion.” 

And so on; through the certain testimony of hundreds of sciences like these, the 
universe  has  been  adorned  with  innumerable  instances  of  wisdom,  purposes,  and 
beneficial  things  within  a  faultless,  perfect  order.  And  the  order  and  wisdom  given 
through that wondrous, all-encompassing wisdom to the totality of the universe have 
been included in small measure in seeds and the tiniest living creatures. It is clear and 
self-evident  that  aims,  purposes,  instances  of  wisdom,  and  benefits  can  only  be 
followed through choice, will,  intention, and volition,  not in any other way. Neither 
could they be the work of unconscious causes and nature, which lack will, choice, and 
purpose, nor could they interfere in them. 

                                                 

1 You can reckon just how much wood, coal, and oil would be necessary for the stove or lamp of 
the sun, which heats the palace of the world. According to the reckoning of astronomy, piles of wood 
equal to a million earths and thousands of oceans of oil would be necessary for it to burn each day. 
Now think! And say: “Glory be to God! What wonders God has willed! Blessed be God!” to the 
number of the sun’s particles in the face of the majesty, wisdom, and power of the All-Powerful One of 
Glory, who makes it give light continuously without firewood or oil. 

 

405

That is to say, it is extraordinary ignorance and foolishness not to recognize or to 
deny  the  All-Wise  Maker,  the  Agent  with  Choice,  whom  the  universe  and  all  its 
beings  necessitate  and  demonstrate  through  their  infinite  order  and  the  instances  of 
wisdom  they  contain.  Yes,  if  there  is  anything  astonishing  in  the  world,  it  is  such 
denial. For the endless aspects of order and instances of wisdom in the beings in the 
universe testify to His existence and unity, so that even the most profoundly ignorant 
can understand what blindness and ignorance it is not to see or not to recognize Him. I 
might even say that among the people of unbelief, the Sophists, who are supposed to 
be  stupid because  they denied  the  universe’s  existence,  are  the  most  intelligent.  For 
since  on  accepting  its  existence,  it  was  not  possible  not  to  believe  in  God  and  its 
Creator,  they  started  to  deny  the  universe’s  existence.  They  denied  themselves  as 
well. Saying, “There  is  nothing,” they abdicated their  intelligences, and being  saved 
from  the  boundless  unreasonableness  –  under  the  guise  of  reason  –  of  the  other 
deniers, they in one sense drew close to reason. 

FOURTH MATTER 

As is indicated in the Tenth Word, for a Wise Maker, a most wise master builder, 
to  follow  carefully  hundreds of  instances  of  wisdom  in  each  stone  of  a  palace,  then 
not to construct the palace’s roof so it falls into ruin and all the innumerable purposes 
and  instances  of  wisdom  are  lost,  is  something  no  conscious  being  could  accept. 
Similarly, it is in no way possible that having followed out of his perfect wisdom tons 
of benefits, aims, and purposes in a tiny seed, a possessor of absolute wisdom should 
go to the great expense of the mighty tree as tall as a mountain so it should produce a 
single benefit, a single small aim, a single fruit worth virtually nothing, and so to be 
wastefully prodigal in a way entirely opposed and contrary to his wisdom.  

In  just  the  same  way,  the  All-Wise  Maker  attaches  hundreds  of  instances  of 
wisdom to each of the beings in the palace of the universe and equips them to perform 
hundreds of duties, and to all trees bestows instances of wisdom to the number of its 
fruits  and  gives  duties  to  the  number of  its  flowers. For  Him  not  to bring  about the 
resurrection  of  the  dead  and  the  Great  Gathering  and  for  all  those  incalculable 
numbers of purposes and instances of wisdom and infinite duties to be meaningless, 
futile, pointless, and without purpose or benefit, would impute absolute impotence to 
that  Absolutely  Powerful  One’s  perfect  power,  just  as  it  would  impute  futility  and 
purposelessness to that Absolutely Wise One’s perfect wisdom, and utter ugliness to 
the beauty of that Absolutely Compassionate One’s mercy,  

 

406

and boundless tyranny to that Absolutely Just One’s perfect justice. It would be quite 
simply to deny the wisdom, mercy, and justice in the universe, which may be seen by 
everyone.  It  would  be  an  extraordinary  impossibility  comprising  innumerable 
absurdities.  Let  the  people  of  misguidance  come  and  see  just  what  a  terrifying 
darkness, obscurity, there is in their misguidance, just as there is in their graves; and 
how they are the nests of scorpions. They should know that belief in the hereafter is a 
way as beautiful and luminous as Paradise, and should embrace  belief. 

FOURTH MATTER 

This consists of two topics. 
F i r s t  T o p i c : Necessitated by His name All-Wise, the All-Glorious Maker 
follows  the  lightest  way,  the  shortest  path,  the  easiest  fashion,  the  most  beneficial 
form, which shows that there is no wastefulness, futility, or absence of benefits in the 
nature  of  things.  Wastefulness  is  the  opposite  of  the  name  Wise,  just  as  frugality  is 
necessitated by it and is its fundamental principle. 

O prodigal, wasteful man! Know that by  not practising frugality, the most basic 
principle  in  the  universe,  you  have  acted  in  a  way  entirely  contrary  to  reality!  You 
should understand what an essential, encompassing principle is taught by the verse, 

Eat and drink, but waste not in excess.(7:31) 

S e c o n d  T o p i c : It may be said that the names Sapient and All-Wise point to 
and  necessitate  the  messengership  of  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings and peace) to the degree of being self-evident. 

Yes,  since  a  meaningful  book  requires  a  teacher  to  explain  it;  and  an  exquisite 
beauty  requires  a  mirror  to  show  itself  and  see  itself;  and  a  perfect  work  of  art 
requires  a  herald  to  announce  it;  for  sure  among  mankind,  who  is  addressed by  the 
mighty book of the universe,  in every  letter of which are  hundreds of meanings and 
instances of wisdom, will be a perfect guide, a supreme teacher. For he will teach the 
sacred, true wisdom in the book; that is, make known the existence of the wisdom and 
purposes in the universe; indeed, be the means of the appearance, and even existence, 
of  the  dominical  purposes  in  the  universe’s  creation;  and  make  known  and  act  as  a 
mirror to the perfect art of the Creator, and the beauty of His names, which He willed 
to display throughout the universe, showing their importance.  

And since the Creator wants to make Himself loved through all His  

 

407

beings  and  to  be  responded  to  by  all  His  intelligent  creatures,  one  of  them  will 
respond with comprehensive worship in the name of all of them in the face of those 
comprehensive  dominical  manifestations;  he  will  bring  the  land  and  sea  to  ecstasy, 
and with a tumultuous announcement and exaltation that will cause the  heavens and 
earth to reverberate turn the gazes of those conscious creatures to the One who made 
the art; and with sacred instruction and teaching and a Qur’an of Mighty Stature that 
will draw the attention of all reasonable people, will demonstrate in the best way the 
divine  purposes  of  that  Sapient  and  All-Wise  Maker;  and  who  will  respond  most 
completely and perfectly to the manifestations of all His instances of wisdom and of 
His beauty and glory; the existence of such a being is as necessary, as essential for the 
universe as the existence of the  sun. And the one who did this and performed those 
functions most perfectly was self-evidently the Most Noble Messenger (Upon whom 
be blessings and peace). In which case, all the wisdom in the universe necessitates the 
messengership  of  Muhammad  (UWBP)  as  the  sun  necessitates  light,  and  light,  the 
day. 

Yes,  just  as  through  their  greatest  manifestation,  the  names  of  Sapient  and  All-
Wise necessitate the messengership of Muhammad (UWBP) at the maximum degree, 
so too numerous most beautiful names like Allah, Most Merciful, All-Compassionate, 
Loving,  Bestower,  Munificent,  Beauteous,  and  Sustainer  necessitate  through  their 
greatest  manifestation  apparent  in  the  universe,  at  the  maximum  degree  and  with 
absolute certainty, the messengership of Muhammad (UWBP). 

For example, the all-embracing mercy which is the manifestation of the name of 
Most  Merciful  is  apparent  through  the  being  sent  as  a  Mercy  to  All  the  Worlds. 
Almighty God’s making Himself known and loved, which is the manifestation of the 
name  of Loving,  yields  the  fruit  of  that  Beloved of  the  Sustainer  of  All the  Worlds 
and finds response in him. All instances of beauty, which are the manifestation of the 
name of Beauteous, that is, the beauty of the divine essence, the beauty of the divine 
names, beauty of art, and the beauty of creatures, are seen and displayed in the mirror 
of  Muhammad  (UWBP).  The  manifestations  of  the  splendour  of  dominicality  and 
sovereignty  of  divinity  are  known,  become  apparent  and  understood,  and  are 
confirmed  through  the  messengership  of  Muhammad  (UWBP),  the  herald  of  the 
dominion of dominicality. And so on, like these examples, most of the most beautiful 
names are shining proofs of the messengership of Muhammad (UWBP). 

In  Short:  Since  the  universe  exists  and  cannot  be  denied,  neither  can  such 
observable  truths  as  wisdom,  grace,  mercy,  beauty,  order,  balance,  and  adornment, 
which are like the colours, embellishments, lights,  

 

408

rays, arts,  lives, and bonds of the universe be denied. Since  it  is  impossible to deny 
these  attributes  and  acts,  certainly  the  Necessarily  Existent,  All-Wise,  Munificent, 
Compassionate, Beauteous,  Sapient,  and  Just  One  also,  who  is  the One  signified  by 
those  attributes,  and  is  the  Doer  of  those  deeds,  and  the  Sun  and  Source  of  those 
lights,  can  in  no  way  be  denied.  And  certainly  the  messengership  of  Muhammad 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace), who is the supreme guide, most perfect teacher, 
pre-eminent  herald,  solver  of  the  talisman  of  the  universe,  mirror  of  the  Eternally 
Besought One, beloved of the Most Merciful, and the means of those attributes and 
acts being known, indeed of their perfection, and even of their being realized, can in 
no  way  be  denied.  His  messenership  is  the  universe’s  most  brilliant  light,  like  the 
lights of the world of reality and of the reality of the universe. 

Blessings and peace be upon him to the number of seconds of the days and of 
the particles of creatures. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which you have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

 

 

409

THE FOURTH POINT 
The Divine Name Single 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Say: He is God, the One and Only.(112:1) 

[One fine point of this verse and a manifestation of the divine 
name  of  Single,  which  is  a  greatest  name  comprising  the 
names of One and Unique, or one of the six lights comprising 
the  greatest  name,  appeared  to  me  in  Eskişehir  Prison  in  the 
month  of  Shawwal.  Referring  the  details  of  that  greatest 
manifestation  to  the  Risale-i  Nur,  we  shall  here  explain 
extremely  briefly 
true 
affirmation  of  divine  unity  which  the  name  of  Single 
demonstrates through its maximum manifestation.] 

in  seven  short  Indications 

the 

FIRST INDICATION 

The  Twenty-Second  Word  and  Thirty-Third  Letter  have  shown  in  detail  that 
through a greatest manifestation, the greatest name Single has placed a seal, a stamp, 
of divine unity on the universe as a whole and on each realm of beings in it, and on 
each individual being. Here, we shall point out only three stamps. 

F i r s t  S t a m p : The manifestation of divine singleness has placed a seal of 
unity  on  the  face  of  the  universe  whereby  it  has  made  it  an  indivisible  whole.  One 
who  does  not  have  power  of  disposal  over  the  whole  universe  cannot  be  the  true 
owner of any part of it. The seal is this: 

Like  the  finest  machinery  in  a  factory,  the  beings  and  realms  of  beings  in  the 
universe  assist  one  another  and  work  to  complete  each  other’s  functions.  With  their 
solidarity  and  co-operation,  their  answering  each  other’s  requests  and  hastening  to 
assist to each other, their embracing each other and being one within the other, they 
form a unity of existence according to which, like the members of the  human body, 
they cannot be separated from each other. A person who controls one of its members 
yet does not have control over all of them, will not have true mastery over the single 
member.  

Thus, this co-operation, solidarity, mutual response, and embracing one  another 

forms a most brilliant supreme seal of divine unity. 

S e c o n d  S t a m p : Through the manifestation of the name Single, so brilliant 

a seal of divine oneness and stamp of unity has been placed on  

 

410

the  face  of  the  earth  and  face  of  the  spring  that  it  proves  that  one  who  does  not 
administer  all  the  living  creatures  on  the  face  of  the  globe  together  with  all  their 
members and attributes and states, and who does not know and see them all together, 
and cannot create them, cannot interfere in anything in respect of creation. The stamp 
is this:  

Disregarding the truly orderly,  yet hidden, stamps of the mineral substances, the 
elements,  and  inanimate  creatures  of  the  earth,  consider  the  following  stamp 
consisting of the woven threads of the two hundred thousand animal species and two 
hundred thousand plant species: we see with our own eyes in the spring on the earth 
that  all  things  with  their  different  duties,  different  forms,  different  sustenance, 
different  members  are  given  everything  they  need,  without  confusion  and  without 
error, with complete distinction and differentiation, with extremely sensitive balance, 
without  difficulty,  at  exactly  the  right  time,  from  unexpected  places  despite  their 
being one within the other and all mixed up together. This situation, this planning, this 
administration forms such a  seal of divine unity  and stamp of oneness that one who 
cannot create all those creatures at once from nothing, cannot interfere in anything at 
all  in  respect  of  dominicality  and  creation.  For  if  something  had  interfered,  the 
equilibrium of that utterly vast administration would have been spoilt. However, man 
apparently serves the smooth application of those laws of dominicality, at the divine 
command. 

T h i r d  S t a m p : This stamp of divine oneness is on man’s face, indeed, is 
man’s face: one who does not hold in his gaze all the human beings who have come 
and  will come  from  the  time  of  Adam  till  the  end of  the  world,  and  cannot  place  a 
distinguishing mark on each of their faces, indeed, hundreds of distinguishing marks, 
can have no part in respect of creation in the stamp of unity on the face of any single 
one  of  them.  Yes,  the  one  who  places  that  stamp  on  man’s  face  must  surely  hold 
within  his  view  and  encompass  with  his  knowledge  all  the  members  of  the  human 
race, for although the basic members of the  human  face resemble one another, each 
face possesses points of difference. All the members of the face, such as the eye and 
ear, resembling each other forms a stamp of unity testifying that humankind’s Maker 
is  One;  similarly,  the  many  wise  differences  –  unlike other  species –  distinguishing 
one from the other so they are not confused and to preserve the rights of all of them, 
are  both  subtle  stamps  of  divine  oneness,  and  denote  the  Maker  of  unity’s  will, 
choice,  and  volition.  They  show  that  one  who  cannot  create  all  men  and  animals, 
indeed, the universe, cannot apply that stamp. 

 

411

SECOND INDICATION 

The  worlds,  species,  and  elements  of  the  universe  are  so  intertwined  and 
interwoven that any cause that does not possess the universe as a whole cannot have 
true disposal over any of its elements. The manifestation of unity proceeding from the 
name  of  Single  has  included  the  whole  universe  within  a  unity  so  that  everything 
proclaims  it. For example, the universe’s  lamp, the  sun, being one  indicates that the 
whole universe belongs to one, so too, the sponges of clouds which water the garden 
of  the  earth  being the  same,  and  the  rain  which  comes  to  aid of  all  living  creatures 
being  the  same  and  falling  everywhere,  and  most  of  the  animal  and  plant  species 
spreading freely over the earth and their species and habitats being the same, are most 
certain signs and testimonies indicating that all those beings, as well the places they 
are found, are the property of a single being. 

Following  this  analogy,  the  realms  of  beings  in  the  universe  are  so  interwoven 
they have made the universe into a totality which is indivisible in respect of creation. 
A cause that does not have rule over the whole universe can govern nothing at all in 
respect of dominicality and creativity; it cannot make a single particle heed it. 

THIRD INDICATION 

Through  its  greatest manifestation,  the  name  Single  has  made  the  universe  into 
innumerable missives of the Eternally Besought One whereby each displays  seals of 
divine oneness and stamps of unity to the number of its words – as though printed – 
and points to its Scribe to the number of those seals. 

Yes, all flowers, all fruits, all grasses, and all animals even, and all trees are seals 
of divine oneness and stamps of divine unity, which, together with the places they are 
found,  which  take  the  form  of  missives,  are  like  signatures  showing  the  one  who 
wrote  the  place.  For  example, a  buttercup in  a  garden is  like  a  seal  of  the  garden’s 
inscriber. Whosever seal the flower is, all flowers of the same sort on the face of the 
earth  indicate  clearly  that  they  are  his  words  and that  the  garden  too  is  his  writing. 
This means that all things ascribe everything to the One who created them, pointing to 
a maximum affirmation of divine unity. 

FOURTH INDICATION 

In addition to being clear as the sun, the greatest manifestation of the name Single 
is so reasonable as to be necessary and can be accepted with infinite ease. Numerous 
proofs  demonstrating  that  the  association  of  partners  with  God,  the  opposite  and 
opponent of that manifestation, is  

 

412

infinitely  difficult  and  infinitely  far  from  reason,  indeed,  impossible  and  precluded, 
have been explained in various parts of the Risale-i Nur. For the present referring the 
details  of  the  points  of  those  proofs  to  those  treatises,  we  shall  here  expound  only 
three Points. 

T h e  F i r s t : We have demonstrated with certain proofs, briefly at the end of 
the Tenth and Twenty-Ninth Words and in detail  at the end of the Twentieth Letter, 
that in relation to the power of the Single and Unique One, the creation of the greatest 
thing is as easy  as the smallest. It administers a  large tree as comfortably as a small 
fruit.  Whereas  if  referred  to  numerous  causes,  each  fruit  becomes  as  difficult  and 
expensive as a tree, and a flower as difficult and troublesome as the spring. 

Yes, if the equipment of an army is made on the orders of a single commander in 
a single factory, it is as easy as making the equipment of a single soldier, whereas if 
the  equipment  of  all  the  soldiers  is  made  in  different  factories  and  the  army’s 
administration  passes  from  a  single  officer  to  many,  then  each  soldier  will  require 
factories to the number of the army’s soldiers. In just the same way, if everything is 
ascribed to the Single and Unique One, the innumerable members of an entire species 
become  as  easy  as  a  single  member.  While  if  attributed  to  causes  each  becomes  as 
difficult as the whole species. 

Yes,  both  unity  and  singleness  come  about  through  everything  being  connected 
with the One of Unity, and through reliance on Him. And this reliance and connection 
may become a boundless power and strength for the thing. Through the strength of the 
reliance  and  connection,  that  small  thing  may  perform  works  far  exceeding  its 
individual strength, and produce results. While something very powerful that does not 
rely on the Single Unique One and is not connected to Him can perform small works 
in accordance with its individual strength, and the results diminish accordingly. 

For example, a strong, bold man who is not a regular soldier is compelled to carry 
his  own  ammunition  and  provisions  himself,  and  so  can  hold  out  only  temporarily 
against  ten  enemy.  For  his  individual  strength  is  limited.  But  a  soldier  who  by 
belonging  to  the  army  is  connected  to  and  relies  on  the  commander-in-chief,  is  not 
compelled  to  carry  his  own  sources  of  strength  and  provisions;  his  connection  and 
reliance  become  an  inexhaustible  strength  for  him,  like  a  treasury.  Through  the 
strength  of  his  connection,  he  may  capture  a  field  marshal  of  the  defeated  enemy 
army, together with thousands of others. 

That is to say,  in divine unity and divine singleness, through the strength of the 

connection, an ant may defeat a Pharaoh and a fly defeat a Nimrod  

 

413

and a microbe a tyrant, and a seed as tiny as a chickpea may bear on its shoulders a 
pine-tree as majestic as a mountain. Yes, a commander-in-chief may send an army to 
the assistance of one soldier and assemble an army behind the soldier so that he has 
the  moral  support  of  the  army  behind  him  and  through  that  strength  may  perform 
great  works  in  the  commander’s  name.  Similarly,  since  the  Pre-Eternal  Monarch  is 
Single and One, He has no need of any sort. If to suppose that He did have need, He 
would  send  all  things  to  the  assistance  of  everything  and  assemble  the  army  of  the 
universe  behind  one  thing  and  everything  could  rely  on  a  strength  as  great  as  the 
universe  and  in  the  face  of  everything, all things  –  to  suppose  that  He  did  have  the 
need – could become like the Single Commander’s strength. If there were  no divine 
singleness, everything would lose all this strength and become as nothing; their results 
too would dwindle to nothing. 

Thus,  the  appearance  of  these  truly  wondrous  works  out  of  most  insignificant 
unimportant  things  which  we  all  the  time  observe  with  our  eyes  self-evidently 
demonstrates divine singleness and divine oneness. If it were not for them, the results, 
fruits, and works of everything would decrease to the substance and strength of each 
thing;  they  would  be  reduced  to  nothing.  Nothing  of  the  infinite  abundance  and 
infinite  inexpensiveness  of  the  extremely  valuable  things  we  see  around  us  would 
remain. A melon or pomegranate that we now buy for a small sum, we would not be 
able  to  procure  for  a  fortune.  Yes,  all  the  ease,  all  the  abundance,  all  the 
inexpensiveness in the world arise from divine unity and testify to divine singleness. 

S  e  c  o  n  d    P  o  i  n  t  :  Beings  are  created  in  two  ways;  one  is  creation  from 
nothing called origination and invention, and other is the giving of existence through 
bringing  together  existent  elements  and  things,  called  composition  and  assembling. 
When in accordance with the manifestation of divine singleness and mystery of divine 
oneness, this occurs with an infinite ease, indeed, such ease as to be necessary. If not 
ascribed to divine singleness, it would be infinitely difficult and irrational, difficult to 
the  degree  of  impossibility.  However,  the  fact  that  the  beings  in  the  universe  come 
into  existence  with  infinite  ease  and  facility  and  no  difficulty  at  all,  and  in  perfect 
form,  self-evidently  shows  the  manifestation  of  divine  singleness  and  proves  that 
everything is directly the art of the Single One of Glory. 

Yes,  if  things  are  ascribed  to  the  Single  One  of  Unity,  they  are  created  from 
nothing through  His infinite power, the immensity of which is perceived through its 
works,  like  striking  a  match.  And  through  His  all-embracing,  infinite  knowledge 
everything  is  appointed  a  measure  like  an  immaterial  mould.  The  particles  of  all 
things are situated easily in the  

 

414

mould existent in knowledge, in accordance with the form and plan of everything in 
the mirror of knowledge and they preserve their positions in good order. 

If  it is  necessary to gather together particles from round about, the particles are 
bound together in regular fashion like the soldiers of an obedient army in accordance 
with the comprehensive principles of power and laws of knowledge. Driven by power 
in accordance with knowledge, they come, enter the mould existent in knowledge in 
accordance  with  the  measure  of  divine  determining,  which  encompasses  the  thing’s 
existence, and with ease form its being. Like the reflection in a mirror being clothed 
in  external  existence  on  paper  by  means  of  a  camera,  or  the  invisible  writing  of  a 
letter  appearing  when  it  is  spread  with  a  special  substance,  with  the  greatest  ease 
power  clothes  with  external  existence  the  essences  of  things  and  forms  of  beings 
present  in  the  mirror  of  the  Single  One  of  Unity’s  pre-eternal  knowledge;  it  brings 
them from the World of Meaning to the Apparent World, and shows them to us. 

If  beings  are  not  ascribed  to  the  Single  One of  Unity,  it  would  be  necessary  to 
gather together the being of a fly from all round the earth and from the elements, quite 
simply  sifting  the  face  of  the  earth  and  the  elements  and  bringing  from  everywhere 
the particles particular to its being. And in order to situate them in proper order in its 
being  so  full  of  art,  a physical  mould,  indeed  moulds to  the  number of  its  members 
would be necessary. Then too the senses  in  its being, and its fine, subtle immaterial 
faculties like spirit, would have to be drawn from the immaterial worlds in a particular 
measure. 

Thus, the creation of a fly in this way would be as difficult as that of the universe. 
The difficulties would be multiplied a hundred times, indeed, would be a compounded 
impossibility. For as all the people of religion and scientists are agreed, nothing apart 
from  the  Single  One  can  create  from  nothing  and  non-existence.  In  which  case,  if 
referred to causes and nature, everything may be given existence only through being 
gathered together from most things. 

T h i r d  P o i n t : We shall explain briefly two or three comparisons which are 
elucidated in other parts of the Risale-i Nur, showing how, if ascribed to a Single One 
of Unity, all things become as easy as a single thing, whereas if referred to causes and 
nature, the existence of a single thing becomes as difficult as that of all things. 

For  example:  If  the  positions  and  administration  of  a  thousand  soldiers  are 
referred  to one  officer,  and  that  of  one  soldier  to  ten  officers,  to  command  the  one 
soldier will be ten times more difficult than commanding a battalion. For those who 
command him will form obstacles to one another,  

 

415

and in the resulting disorder, the soldier will have no peace. Whereas if to obtain the 
desired  result  and  situation  a  battalion  is  referred  to  a  single  officer,  he  can  achieve 
the result easily, without difficulty, and give it that situation. If to obtain the result and 
situation,  it  is  referred  to  the  soldiers  without  a  chief,  leader,  or  sergeant,  they  will 
only be achieved with much dispute and difficulty, in great disorder, and deficiently. 

Second  Comparison:  For  example,  if  a  master  builder  is  appointed  to  give  the 
stones in the dome of a mosque like Aya Sophia their suspended position, he may do 
so easily. But if  it is referred to the stones themselves, they  will  all  have to be both 
absolutely  dominant  and  absolutely  subject  to  each  other  in  order  to  support  each 
other in that suspended position. For the work the master builder performs easily to be 
carried  out,  work  a  hundred  times  greater,  of  a  hundred  builders,  will  have  to  be 
carried out, only then may such a position be achieved. 

Third  Comparison:  For  example,  since  the  globe  of  the  earth  is  an  official,  a 
soldier, of  the  Single  One of  Unity  which  heeds  that  single  One’s  single  command, 
such  results  are  obtained  as  the  change  of  the  seasons,  the  alternation  of  day  and 
night, the lofty, majestic motions of the heavens, and the changes in the cinema-like 
celestial scenes. On receiving the single command of that Single One, in rapturous joy 
at  its  duty,  a  single  soldier  like  the  earth  rises  to  revolve  in  two  motions  like  an 
ecstatic Mevlevi dervish, and is the means to those splendid results being achieved. It 
is as if the single soldier  is commanding magnificent manoeuvres on the  face of the 
universe. 

If  not  ascribed  to  a  Single  One  whose  rule  of  divinity  and  sovereignty  of 
dominicality  encompass the whole universe, and whose command and rule cover all 
beings,  those  results,  heavenly  maneouvres,  and  earthly  seasons  could  only  be 
obtained  by  millions  of  stars  and  globes  a  thousand  times  larger  than  the  earth 
travelling  the  long  distance  of  millions  of  years  every  twenty-four  hours  and  every 
year. 

Thus, those results being obtained through the two motions – in its orbit and on 
its  axis  like  an  ecstatic  Mevlevi  dervish  –  of  a  single  official  like  the  globe  of  the 
earth,  is  an  example  of  the  infinite  ease  there  is  in  divine  unity.  While  their  being 
obtained through endlessly long ways millions of times more difficult than the motion 
described above is an example of just how difficult, indeed, impossible is the way of 
associating  partners with  God  and unbelief,  and  just  what  impossible,  absurd  things 
are found on it. 

Consider  the  ignorance  of  those  who  worship  causes  and  nature  through  the 
following example: you can understand how far from reason it is and how ignorant to 
suppose that after preparing in orderly fashion through his  

 

416

wondrous art the parts or machinery of a wonderful factory, or marvellous clock, or 
splendid palace, or fine book, a person does not himself assemble the parts easily and 
work them, but with protracted and high expense makes each part, each mechanism, 
and even each  sheet of paper and pen into extraordinary  machines in order to make 
the parts themselves construct and work the factory, palace, and clock, and write the 
book instead  of  the  craftsman.  And  he  refers  to  them  the  art  and  craft,  which is the 
means of displaying all his arts and skills, which he has great desire to exhibit. 

In just the same way, those who attribute creation to causes and nature fall into 
compounded  ignorance.  For  above  nature  and  causes  are  extremely  well-ordered 
works of art, and they too are artefacts like other creatures. The one who makes them 
thus, makes their results too and displays them together. The one who makes the seed, 
also makes the tree above it. And the one who makes the tree, is the one who makes 
the  fruits  above  it.  Otherwise  further  well-ordered  natures  and  causes  would  be 
necessary for other, different natures and causes to come into existence. And so on, ad 
infinitum.  One  would  have  to  accept  the  existence  of  an  infinite,  meaningless, 
impossible chain of illusory fancies. This would be the most extraordinary ignorance. 

FIFTH INDICATION 

We  have  demonstrated  with  decisive  proofs  in  many  places  that  the  most 
fundamental  characteristic  of  rulership  is  independence  and  separateness.  Even  the 
weak  shadow  of  rulership  in  impotent  men  vehemently  rejects  the  interference  of 
others and does not permit others to meddle in its duty, and in this way preserves its 
independence. Many  kings have mercilessly put to death their innocent children and 
loved  brothers  on  account  of  this  rejection  of  interference.  That  is  to  say, 
independence,  separateness,  and  the  rejection  of  the  interference  of  others  are  the 
most  basic  characteristics  of  true  rulership,  and  are  its  inseparable  necessities  and 
perpetual essentials. 

It is because of this characteristic that divine rulership, which is at the degree of 
absolute dominicality, most vehemently rejects the association of any partners and the 
participation  and  interference  of  others.  The  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  too, 
insistently,  repeatedly,  and  sternly,  indicates  divine  unity  and  rejects  with  severe 
threats the association of partners with God. 

Thus, the divine rulership in dominicality necessitates divine unity and indicates 

a most powerful motive and necessitating cause for it. So too the  

 

417

infinitely  perfect  order  and  harmony  on  the  face  of  the  universe,  apparent  from  the 
totality  of  the  universe  and  the  stars,  and  the  plants,  animals  and  minerals  to 
particulars, individuals, and minute particles, form an indubitably veracious witness to 
and  clear  proof  of  that  singleness  and  unity.  For  if  others  had  interfered,  this  most 
sensitive  balance,  order,  and  regularity  of  the  universe  would  have  been  spoilt  and 
signs  of  disorder  would  have  been  apparent.  In  accordance  with  the meaning  of the 
verse, 

If  there  were  in  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  other  gods  besides  God,  there 
would have been confusion in both!,(21:22) 

this wondrous, perfect order of the universe would have been thrown into confusion 
and been spoilt. Whereas, according to the verse, 

So turn your vision again; do you see any flaw?,(67:3) 

from minute particles to the planets, from the ground to the divine throne, there is no 
sign of fault, defect, or confusion. Thus the order of the universe and of creatures and 
the  balance  of  beings,  demonstrate  most  brilliantly  the  greatest  manifestation  of  the 
name of Single and testify to divine unity. 

Moreover, since, through the mystery of the manifestation of divine oneness, the 
tiniest  living  creature  is  a  miniature  sample  of  the  universe  and  a  small  index  of  it, 
only the One who holds the whole universe in the grasp of His power can lay claim to 
it. And since, in regard to creation, a seed is not inferior to a tree, and a tree is a small 
universe, and all living beings are like small universes and small worlds, this mystery 
of divine oneness has made the association of partners with God impossible. 

By virtue of this mystery, the universe is not only an indivisible whole, but is also 
by its nature, a universal whose division and being broken up into parts is impossible 
and  which  does  not  accept  participation  and  numerous  hands  in  its  creation.  Thus, 
since  each  part  of  it  is  a  particular  and  individual  part,  and  the  whole  also  is  a 
universal, it precludes the participation of others in it. It proves to the degree of being 
self-evident  the  greatest  manifestation  of  the  name  of  Single,  the  reality  of  divine 
unity, and this mystery of divine oneness. 

Yes,  since  the  realms  of  beings  in  the  universe  are  interwoven  and  interbonded 
and  the  functions  of  each  look  to  all,  it  has  made  the  universe,  in  respect  of 
dominicality  and  creation,  like  an  indivisible  whole.  So  too,  the  all-encompassing 
general acts in the universe are interwoven and interpenetrated. For example, the acts 
of nurturing and giving of sustenance are apparent at the same instant within the act of 
giving  life.  And  the  acts  of  ordering  and  decking  out  the  living creature’s  body  are 
observed at the same time within those acts of nurturing and giving of life. And at the 
same  

 

418

time the acts of giving of form, raising, and regulating strike the eye within those acts 
of  nurturing,  giving  life,  ordering,  and  decking  out.  And  so  on,  since  such  all-
encompassing  and  general  acts  are  interpenetrated  and  one  within  the  other  and 
blended together like the seven colours in light, indeed, are united; and since each of 
those acts encompasses and embraces most beings and are a single act and by nature 
are the  same; and since the one who performs the acts must be the same; and since 
each  of  them  pervades  the  whole  universe  and  unites  with  the  other  acts  in  co-
operation and assistance; it has made the universe into an indivisible whole. Similarly, 
since all  living creatures are  like seeds, indexes,  and samples of the universe,  it  has 
made  the  universe  from  the  point  of  view  of  dominicality  like  a  universal  whose 
division and breaking into parts is impossible. That is to say, the universe is a totality 
so  that  to  be  Lord  and  Sustainer  of  a  part  of  it  is  only  possible  by  being  Lord  and 
Sustainer of the whole. And it is a universal so that each part of it has become like a 
single  member; to  make  any  one  single member submit  to  His  dominicality  is  only 
possible by subjugating the universal. 

SIXTH INDICATION 

Dominical singleness and divine unity are the means and basis of all perfections,1 
and the source and origin of the purposes and wisdom in the universe’s creation. They 
are  also  the  source  and  sole  means  of  attaining  the  wishes  and  desires  of  conscious 
beings  and  rational  beings,  and  particularly  of  man.  If  not  for  divine  singleness,  all 
man’s  wishes  and  demands  would  be  extinguished.  The  results  of  the  universe’s 
creation  would  also  decline  to  nothing,  and  the  majority  of  existent,  certain 
perfections would be annihilated. 

For example, man has an intense, unshakeable, passionate desire for immortality. 
Only  One  who  through  the  mystery  of  singleness  holds  the  whole  universe  in  His 
grasp and can close down this world and open up the hereafter as easily as shutting up 
one  house  and  opening  another  can  satisfy  this  desire.  And  like  this  one,  man’s 
thousands of desires which stretch to eternity and are spread throughout the universe 
are tied to the mystery of  

                                                 

1 In fact, divine unity is the clearest proof and most powerful evidence for the existence of endless 
divine perfections and beauty. For if the universe’s Maker is known to be the Unique One of Unity, all 
the perfections and beauty of the universe are known to be the shadows, manifestations, signs, and 
distillations of the sacred perfections and beauty present in that Maker of Unity. Otherwise the 
universe’s perfections and beauties would have pertained to creatures and causes, and the eternal 
treasury of divine perfections would have remained unknown for the human mind, and without a key. 

 

419

singleness and the reality of divine unity. If not for divine singleness, they would not 
be, they would be fruitless. And if  not for the Single One who through divine unity 
has disposal over the entire universe, those desires could not be satisfied. And even 
supposing they were, they would be so very deficiently. 

It  is  because  of  this  mighty  mystery  that  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition 
repeatedly  and  fervently  and  with  elevated  eloquence  teaches  divine  unity  and 
singleness.  Similarly,  all  the  prophets,  purified  scholars,  and  saints  found  their 
greatest pleasure and happiness in the profession of divine unity, “There is no god but 
God.” 

SEVENTH INDICATION 

Just  as  Muhammad  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  taught,  proved,  and 
proclaimed most perfectly the true affirmation of divine unity in all its degrees, so his 
messengership  was  established  as  surely  and  certainly  as  divine  unity.  For  since  he 
taught divine unity, the greatest reality in the sphere of existence, together with all its 
truths,  it  may  be  said  that  all  the  arguments  proving  divine  unity  indirectly  though 
decisively prove his messengership, the authenticity of his duty, and the rightness of 
his cause. Yes, a messengership that discovered and truly taught divine singleness and 
unity,  which  bring  together  those  thousands  of  elevated  truths,  is  most  definitely 
necessitated and required by that singleness and unity; they certainly require it. 

Thus, Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings and peace) carried out that duty to 
the letter. Now, we shall explain by way of example, three out of numerous evidences 
and  causes  that  testify  to  the  importance  and  elevatedness  of  his  collective 
personality, attesting that it is a sun in the universe. 

T  h  e    F  i  r  s t  :  In  accordance  with  the  rule  “The  cause  is  like  the  doer,” the 
equivalent  of  all  the  good  deeds  performed  throughout  the  centuries  by  all  his 
community  has  passed  to  the  book  of  good  deeds  of  Muhammad  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace).  So  too,  by  thinking  of  the  certain  acceptance  of  the  salawa\t 
prayers for the Prophet (UWBP), which every day  all his community recite  for him, 
and the station and degree that those endless prayers necessitate, it may be understood 
that the collective personality of Muhammad (UWBP) is a sun in the universe. 

T h e  S e c o n d : Think of Muhammad’s (Upon whom be blessings and peace) 
spiritual  progress:  his  essential  being  was  the  source,  seed,  life,  and  means  of  the 
mighty tree of the world of Islam: it arose from his performing with his extraordinary 
capacity and faculties the  sacred worship and glorifications which  form the spiritual 
aspects of the world of Islam,  

 

420

perceiving  all  their  meaning;  so  understand  how  much  more  elevated  than  other 
sainthoods was the sainthood of Muhammadan (UWBP) worship, by which he rose to 
the rank of God’s beloved. 

At one time, a single glorification was unfolded to me in one of the prayers in a 
manner close to how the Companions of the Prophet perceived them, and it appeared 
to me as important as a month’s worship. I understood the Companions’ high worth. 
It meant that in the early days of Islam, the effulgence and light proceeding from the 
sacred  words  had  a  different  quality.  Their  newness  imparted  a  different  flavour, 
subtlety, and freshness that with the passage of time have become obscured and have 
diminished  through  neglect.  With  his  wondrous  capacity  Muhammad  (UWBP) 
received  them  new  and  fresh  from  their  original  source,  the  Most  Pure  and  Holy 
Essence,  and  absorbed  and  assimilated  them.  He  could  therefore  receive  the 
effulgence  from  a  single  glorification  that  others  could  receive  only  from  a  years’ 
worship. 

From this you may understand the degree Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings 
and peace) progressed through the degrees of perfections, which are without bound or 
limit. 

T h e  T h i r d : Since mankind is the pivot of all the Creator’s purposes in the 
universe; and since with his superior understanding man has received the addresses of 
that  Glorious  One;  and  since  Muhammad  (UWBP)  was  the  most  famous  and 
renowned of mankind, and as his works and achievements testify, its most perfect and 
magnificent  individual;  that  Single  One  of  Glory  took  Muhammad  (UWBP)  as  His 
addressee  in  the  name  of  mankind,  indeed,  on  account  of  the  whole  universe;  He 
made manifest in him boundless effulgences and endless perfections. 

There are numerous points like these three that prove conclusively that just as the 
collective personality of Muhammad (UWBP) is the spiritual sun of the universe, so 
is it the supreme sign of the mighty Qur’an  known  as the universe, and the  greatest 
name of that Supreme Distinguisher between Truth and Falsehood, and the mirror of 
the  greatest  manifestation  of  the  name  Single.  We  beseech  the  Single,  Unique, 
Eternally  Besought  One  that  blessings  and  peace  to  the  number  of  particles  of  the 
universe multiplied by the seconds of the minutes of all time descend on Muhammad 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) from the infinite treasury of His mercy. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

 

421

THE FIFTH POINT 
The Divine Name Ever-Living 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Look, then, to the signs of God’s mercy – how He restores life to the earth 
after  its  death –  verily  He  it  is  Who quickens  the  dead,  for  He  is  powerful 
over all things.(30:50)  

There appeared to my mind in the distance in the month of Shawwal in Eskişehir 
Prison  a  fine  point  concerning  this  mighty  verse,  and  another  about  the  following 
mighty verse, 

God!  There  is  no  god  but  He,  the  Living,  the  Self-Subsisting,  Eternal.  No 
slumber can seize Him nor sleep,(2:255) 

together with a manifestation of the name Ever-Living, which is the greatest name or 
one of the two lights of the greatest name or one light of its six lights. I did not record 
them, for at the time I was unable to swiftly capture that sacred bird. Now after it has 
drawn away, I shall at least indicate briefly by means of a number of signs a few rays 
of that supreme truth and sublime light. 

FIRST SIGN 

The index-like answer to the questions “What is life?”and “What is its true nature 
and  purpose?”,  which  are  a  greatest  manifestation  of  the  names  of  Ever-Living  and 
Giver of Life, is this: 

Life is: 
The most important aim of the universe; 
Its greatest result; 
Its most brilliant light; 
Its subtlest leaven; 
Its distilled essence; 
Its most perfect fruit; 
Its most elevated perfection; 
Its finest beauty; 
Its most beautiful adornment; 
The secret of its undividedness; 
The bond of its unity; 
The source of its perfections; 

 

422

In regard to art and nature, a most wondrous being endowed with spirit; 
A miraculous reality which makes the tiniest creature into a universe; 
A most extraordinary miracle of divine power that connects the animate creature 
to most beings and makes it a tiny universe as well as being the means whereby the 
universe is situated in a tiny animate creature and displays a sort of index of the huge 
universe in the creature; 

A  wondrous  divine  art  that  makes  a  tiny  part  the  greatest  whole,  and  makes  a 
particular a universal or world, and shows that in regard to dominicality the universe 
is an indivisible whole or universal that cannot be broken into parts and which accepts 
no participation; 

The most brilliant, the most decisive, and the most perfect of proofs testifying to 
the  necessary  existence  of  the  Ever-Living  and  Self-Subsistent  One;  and  among 
divine  artefacts  is  the  lightest  and  most    apparent,  and  the  most  valuable  and 
abundant, and the purest, most shining, and most meaningful embroidery of dominical 
art;  

A  graceful,  refined,  delicate  manifestation  of  divine  mercy  which  makes  other 

beings serve itself; 

A comprehensive mirror of the divine attributes; 
A wonder of dominical creation comprising the manifestations of such numerous 
most  beautiful  names  as  Merciful,  Provider,  Compassionate,  Munificent,  and  All-
Wise, that subjects to  itself many truths  like  sustenance, wisdom, grace, and mercy, 
and is the source and origin of all the senses, like sight, hearing, and touch; 

A transformation-machine in the vast workshop of the universe that continuously 
cleanses everywhere,  purifies,  allows  progress,  and  illuminates,  while living bodies, 
the  dwellings  of  life,  are  guesthouses,  schools,  and  barracks  for  instructing  and 
illuminating  the  caravans  of  particles,  enabling  them  to  perform  their  duties.  Quite 
simply  the  Ever-Living  Self-Subsistent  One makes  subtle this  dark,  transient,  lowly 
world, illuminates it and gives it a sort of permanence, preparing it to go to another, 
everlasting world; 

Life’s two faces, that is, its inner and outer faces, are both shining, elevated, and 
without dirt or defect. It is an exceptional creature on which apparent causes have not 
been  placed,  veiling  the  disposal  of  power,  in  order  to  show  clearly  that  it  has 
emerged directly without veil or means from the hand of dominical power; 

The reality of life looks to the six pillars of belief, proving them in meaning and 
indirectly.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  a  luminous  truth  which  looks  to and  proves  both  the 
necessary existence of the Necessarily Existent One  

 

423

and  His  eternal  life,  and  the  realm  of  the  hereafter  and  everlasting  life,  and  the 
existence of the angels, and the other pillars of belief. 

Also, just as life is the purest essence of the universe, distilled from of it, so it is a 
mighty  mystery  producing  thanks,  worship,  praise,  and  love,  the  most  important 
divine purposes in the universe and most important results of the world’s creation. 

So  consider  these  twenty-nine  significant,  valuable  characteristics  of  life,  and 
elevated, general duties. Then look and see the tremendousness of the name of Ever-
Living  behind  the  name  of  Giver  of  Life.  Understand  too  how  with  these  immense 
characteristics and fruits of life, the name of Ever-Living is a greatest name. 

Also understand that since life is the most important result of the universe, and its 
greatest  aim  and  most  valuable  fruit,  it  must  have  an  aim  and  result  as  vast  as  the 
universe.  For  the  tree’s  result  is  its  fruit,  so  the  fruit’s  result  is  the  future  tree  by 
means of the seed. Yes, just as the aim and result of this life is eternal life, so one of 
its fruits  is thanks to the Ever-Living Giver of  Life, and worship and praise of  Him 
and love for Him. And just as this thanks, love, praise and worship are the fruit of life, 
so are they the aim of the universe. 

Understand  also  from  this,  the  ugly  ignorance  and  denial,  indeed,  unbelief,  of 
those who say that the purpose of life is to live comfortably, enjoy oneself heedlessly, 
and  indulge  oneself  in  pleasure,  and  how  they  denigrate  and  insult  the  precious 
bounty  of  life,  gift  of  consciousness,  and  bounty  of  reason,  and  what  ghastly 
ingratitude they display. 

SECOND SIGN 

One would have to write treatises to the number of life’s attributes to explain all 
its  degrees,  attributes,  and  duties,  which  is  a  maximum  manifestation  of  the  names 
Ever-Living  and  Giver  of  Life,  mentioned  in  the  index  in  the  First  Sign.  So  since 
some of them have been elucidated in various parts of the Risale-i Nur, we refer you 
to them for some of the details, and here point out only a few others. 

It  was  said  in  the  twenty-third  of  the  twenty-nine  properties  of  life  that  since 
life’s two faces are transparent and unsullied, apparent causes have not been made a 
veil to the disposals of dominical power. 

Yes,  the  meaning  of  this  is  as  follows:  for  sure  everything  in  the  universe 
contains good and beauty, while evil and ugliness are minor, and have the function of 
being units of measurement to show the degrees of good and beauty and to augment 
and  multiply  their  realities.  In  this  way  the  evil  becomes  good  and  the  ugliness, 
beauty. And apparent causes have  

 

424

been made a  veil to the disposals of power so that the complaints and anger  arising 
from  what  are  to  the  superficial  view  of  conscious  beings  apparently  ugliness, 
badness, disasters, and calamities, should not be directed to the Ever-Living and Self-
Subsistent One, and so that the contact of sacred, pure divine power with apparently 
vile  and  filthy  things  should  not  offend  the  dignity  of  power.  The  causes  cannot 
create, but have been placed to be the target of unjust complaints and objections and 
to preserve the dignity, sacredness, and unblemished nature of divine power. 

As is explained in the  Introduction to the Second Station of the Twenty-Second 
Word, Azra’il (Upon whom be peace) supplicated Almighty God concerning his duty 
of seizing the spirits of the dying, saying: “Your servants will be angry with me.” He 
was told in reply: “I shall place the veil of illness and calamity between your duty and 
the dying, then they shall fling their arrows of complaint and objection, not at you, but 
at those veils.” 

According to this supplication, Azra’il’s (Upon whom be peace) duty is a veil as 
other causes are apparent veils, so that the anger and complaints of those who do not 
see the true, beautiful face of death – beautiful for the people of belief – and do not 
know the manifestation of mercy on it, are not directed to the Ever-Living and Self-
Subsistent  One.  Yes,  dignity  and  grandeur  require  that  causes  are  curtain-holders  to 
the  Hand  of  Power  in  the  mind’s  view,  while  divine  unity  and  glory  demand  that 
causes withdraw their hands and have no true effect. 

However, since both the outer and inner faces of life are without dirt, defect, or 
fault,  there  is  nothing  to  invite  complaints  and  objections;  they  hold  no  filth  or 
ugliness contrary to the dignity and sacredness of power. The faces of life, therefore, 
have been surrendered directly, without veil, to the hand of the life-giving, restoring, 
resurrecting  name of the Ever-Living Self-Subsistent One. Light is the same, and so 
are existence and the  giving of existence. For this reason, creation and the giving of 
existence look directly without veil to the power of the All-Glorious One. Moreover, 
since rain is a sort of life and mercy, the time of its precipitation has not been made 
subject to a regular law, so that at all times of need hands will be raised to the divine 
court to seek it. If like the rising of the sun, rain had been subject to a law, that vital 
bounty would not have been sought and asked for at times of need. 

THIRD SIGN 

It  was  said  in  the  twenty-ninth  property  of  life  that  just  as  the  result  of  the 
universe is life, so are thanks and worship the result of life, and the cause and ultimate 
reason for the universe’s creation, and its desired result. 

 

425

Yes,  the  universe’s  Ever-Living  Self-Subsistent  Maker  certainly  wants  thanks 
from living creatures in return for His making  Himself  known and loved through so 
many  sorts  of  bounties,  and  He  wants  their  praise  and  laudation  in  return  for  His 
precious  arts,  and  for  His  creatures  to  respond  with  worship  and  obedience  to  His 
dominical commands. 

In accordance with this mystery of dominicality, it is because thanks and worship 
are  the  most  important  purpose  of  every  sort  of  life  and  therefore  of  the  whole 
universe  that  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  urges  thanks  and  worship  with 
fervour,  intensity,  and  sweetness.  It  states  repeatedly  that  worship  is  for  God  alone, 
thanks  is  due only  to  Him,  and  praise  is  particular  to  Him. To  state  that  thanks  and 
praise should go directly to its True Owner, verses like, 

It is He Who gives life and death, and to Him [is due] the alternation of night 
and day.(23:80)  *  It  is  He  Who gives life and death; and  when  He decides 
upon an affair, He says to it: “Be!”, and it is.(40:68) * And gives life to the 
earth after its death,(30:24) 

point out that He holds life together with all its attributes, without veil, in the grasp of 
His  power,  and  they  reject  intermediaries  explicitly,  and  ascribe  life  directly  to  the 
Ever-Living  and  Self-Subsistent  One’s  hand  of  power,  restricting  it  to  Him.  The 
verses, 

For God is He Who gives [all] sustenance – Lord of Power – Steadfast for 
ever.(51:58) * And when I am ill, it is He Who cures me.(26:80) * He is the 
One that sends down rain [even] after [men] have given up all hope,(42:28) 

show  that  things  which  provoke  thanks  such  as  sustenance,  healing  and  rain,  which 
also invite gratitude and thanks and stimulate a feeling of love and praise, also pertain 
directly to the Healing Provider, and that causes and intermediaries are a veil; that is, 
that sustenance, healing, and rain are particular to and restricted to the power of the 
Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One. To express this in accordance with the rules of 
grammar, the restrictive pronoun, “For God is He Who” [Hu ar-Razzaq] and “He  is 
the  One  that”  [Hu  aladhi]  has  been  used.  The  True  Healer  is  the  one  who  gives 
medicines their properties and creates their effects. 

FOURTH SIGN 

It was explained concerning the twenty-eighth property of life, that life looks to 

the six pillars of belief and proves them; it points to their truth. 

Yes,  since  life  is  the  most  important  result  and  fruit  of  the  universe,  and  the 
purpose of its creation, certainly that elevated reality is not restricted to this fleeting, 
brief, deficient, painful worldly life. The aim and result of the  

 

426

tree of life, the immensity of which is understood through its twenty-nine properties, 
is  eternal  life  and  the  life  of  the  hereafter;  it  is  life  in  the  realm  of  bliss,  the  very 
stones, trees, and earth of which are alive. The tree of life, decked out with this many 
significant  members,  would  otherwise  remain  without  fruit,  benefit,  purpose,  and 
reality  for  intelligent  beings  and  especially  for  man.  Then  man,  whose  capital  and 
faculties are twenty times greater and more numerous than those of a sparrow and is 
the most exalted and important creature in the universe, and the highest living being, 
would  fall  lower  than  a sparrow  in  respect  of  the happiness  of  life,  and become  the 
most unhappy, the most debased of wretches. 

Furthermore,  by  dwelling  on  the  pains  of  the  past  and  fears  of  the  future,  the 
intelligence,  the  most  precious  of  bounties,  would  continuously  wound  the  human 
heart;  because  it  mixes  nine  pains  with  a  single  pleasure,  it  would  become  a 
calamitous affliction. This would be false to the hundredth degree. That is to say, the 
life  of  this  world  proves  the  pillar  of  belief  in  the  hereafter  decisively  and  in  the 
spring,  lays  before  our  eyes  more  than  three  hundred  thousand  examples  of  the 
resurrection of the dead. 

Is it at all possible that the All-Powerful Disposer of Affairs, who prepares with 
wisdom,  grace,  and  mercy  in  your  garden  and  country  all  the  things  and  members 
necessary  for  your  life;  who  makes  them  reach  you  at  the  appropriate  time;  who 
knows  and  hears  even  the  tiny,  particular  prayer  for  food offered  by  your  stomach 
through its desire for continued existence; and gratifies it, showing with innumerable 
delicious foods that He accepts its prayer – is it  at all possible  He does not see  you 
and  know  you;  would  not  prepare  everything  necessary  for  eternal  life,  mankind’s 
greatest  goal;  and  would  not  accept  mankind’s  most  urgent,  important,  universal 
prayer for immortality, of which it  is worthy, through constructing the  hereafter and 
creating Paradise; that He would not hear man’s most powerful, general prayer, which 
rings out from the ground to the divine throne, although he is the ruler and result of 
the earth, nor hold him as important as a stomach, would not gratify him, so make him 
deny His perfect wisdom and endless mercy? God forbid, a hundred thousand times! 

Is  it  at  all  possible  that  He  should  hear  the  most  secret  voice  of  the  tiniest 
particular  of  life,  heed  its  plaint,  supply  its  cure,  answer  its  want,  nourish  it 
solicitously, cause others to serve it attentively, and make His large creatures assist it; 
then  not hear the thunderous voice of the  largest and most valuable, immortal, most 
delicate  life;  and  not  take  into  consideration  its  powerful  plea  and  prayer  for 
immortality?  That  He  should  equip  and  superintend  a  common  soldier  with  the 
greatest care and disregard a magnificent, obedient army? That He should see an atom 
and not see the sun?  

 

427

That He should hear the buzzing of a mosquito and not hear the roar of thunder? God 
forbid! A hundred thousand times, God forbid! 

Could the reason in any way accept that an All-Powerful and All-Wise One who 
is  infinitely  merciful,  loving,  and  compassionate,  who  greatly  loves  His  own  art, 
makes Himself much loved, and loves greatly those who love Him, would condemn to 
everlasting death the life that loves Himself more than anything, is lovable and loved 
and by nature loves its Maker, condemn to death the spirit, the essence and substance 
of  life;  would  He  offend  and  make  angry  with  Himself  for  all  eternity  that  beloved 
friend  of  His,  and  wounding  him  in  terrible  fashion deny  the  mystery  of  His  mercy 
and light of His love, and make him deny it? A hundred thousand times, God forbid! 
The  absolute  beauty  which  adorns  the  universe  with  its  manifestation,  the  absolute 
mercy which makes  happy all creatures, is most certainly exempt from such infinite 
ugliness, far elevated above such absolute tyranny, such unkindness.  

C  o  n  c  l  u  s  i  o  n  :  Since  there  is  life  in  this  world,  those  who understand  the 
secret of  life  and do  not  misuse  their  lives  will  manifest  eternal  life  in  the  realm  of 
eternity and everlasting Paradise. In this we believe! 

Shining objects on the  face of the earth  glistening with the  sun’s reflection, and 
bubbles on the surface of the sea sparkling and dying away with flashes of light and 
the  bubbles  that  follow  on  after  them  again  acting  as  mirrors  to  the  imaginary 
miniature  suns,  self-evidently  show  that  those  flashes  are  the  reflections  and 
manifestations of a single, elevated sun. They recall the sun’s existence with various 
tongues, and point to it with their fingers of light. 

In just the same way, through the  greatest manifestation of the Ever-Living and 
Self-Subsistent One’s name of Giver of Life, the living creatures on the earth and in 
the  sea  shine  through  divine  power,  and  in  order to make  way  for  those  that  follow 
after  them,  utter  “O  Living  One!”  and  vanish  behind  the  veil  of  the  Unseen,  thus 
indicating  and  testifying  to  the  life  and  necessary  existence  of  the  Ever-Living  and 
Self-Subsistent One, who possesses eternal life.  

Furthermore, all the evidences testifying to divine knowledge, the effect of which 
is apparent in the ordering of all creatures; and all the proofs demonstrating the power 
which  has  disposal  over  the  universe;  and  all  the  evidences  proving  the  will  and 
volition  which  governs  and  directs  the  universe;  and  all  the  signs  and  miracles 
proving the missions of the prophets, the channels of divine revelation and dominical 
speech;  and  all  the  evidences  attesting  to  the  seven  divine  attributes  –  all  these 
unanimously  indicate,  denote,  and  testify  to  the  life  of  the  Ever-Living  and  Self-
Subsistent One.  

 

428

For if a thing has sight, it also has life; and if it has hearing, it is a sign of life; and 
if it has speech, it points to the existence of life; and if it has will and choice, it shows 
life. Thus, attributes such as absolute power, comprehensive will, and all-embracing 
knowledge, the existence of which is clear and certain due to their works and effects 
in the universe, testify, through all their evidences, to the life and necessary existence 
of  the  Ever-Living  and  Self-Subsistent  One,  the  eternal  life  which  illuminates  the 
whole  universe  with  a  single  of  its  shadows,  and,  through  a  single  of  its 
manifestations gives life to the realm of the hereafter, even its very particles. 

Life  looks  also  to  the pillar  of belief  in  the  angels  and  proves  it  indirectly.  For 
since the most important result of the universe is life; and it is living beings that are 
most widely spread, and because of their value, their copies are most duplicated, and 
who populate the guesthouse of the earth with their travelling caravans; and since the 
globe of the earth has been filled with so many living creatures, and for the purpose of 
renewing  and  multiplying  the  animate  species  is  continuously  emptied  and  refilled; 
and since life is created on it in even rotting and corrupt matter and it has become a 
mass  of  micro-organisms;  and  since  consciousness  and  intelligence,  the  purest 
distilled essence of life, and spirit, its most subtle and stable substance, are created in 
great  profusion  on  the  earth,  and  quite  simply  the  earth  has  been  infused  with  life 
through life, intelligence, consciousness, and spirits, and inhabited in that way; since 
this  is  so, surely  the  heavenly bodies,  which  are  subtler, more  luminous,  larger  and 
more  important  than  the  earth,  could  not  be  dead,  inanimate,  lacking  life  and 
consciousness;  it  would  be  beyond  the  bounds  of  possibility.  That  is  to  say,  in 
accordance with the mystery of life, there will surely be living, conscious inhabitants 
of the skies, the suns, and the stars suitable to the heavens, who will endow them with 
their living state, demonstrate the result of the creation of the heavens, and receive the 
divine addresses; and they are the angels. 

The essential nature of life also looks to the pillar of belief in the messengers, and 
proves it indirectly. Yes, since the universe was created for life, and life is a greatest 
manifestation  of  the  Pre-Eternal  Self-Subsistent  One,  a  perfect  inscription  of  His,  a 
most  beautiful  work  of  His  art;  and  since  the  Eternal  Life  shows  Itself  through  the 
sending  of  messengers  and  revealing  of  scriptures,  for  if  there  were  no  Books  or 
messengers,  that  Pre-Eternal  Life  would  not  be  known  –  just  as  it  is  through  his 
speech  that  it  is  understood  that  a  person  is  alive,  so  too  it  is  messengers  and  the 
scriptures they bring that make known the words and speech of the One who speaks 
from beyond the World of the Unseen, beneath the veil of the universe,  

 

429

who commands and prohibits and utters His address – then certainly just as the life in 
the  universe  testifies  decisively  to  the  necessary  existence  of  the  Pre-Eternal  Ever-
Living  One,  it  looks  also  to  the  pillars  of  belief  the  sending  of  messengers  and 
revelation  of  scriptures,  which  are  the  rays,  manifestations,  and  communications  of 
that Pre-Eternal Life. And since the messengership of Muhammad (UWBP) and the 
Qur’anic revelation are like the spirit and intelligence of life, it may be said that their 
truth is as certain as the existence of life. 

Yes,  just  as  life  is  the  distilled  essence  of  the  universe;  and  consciousness  and 
sense perception are distilled from life and are the essence of life; and intelligence too 
is  distilled  from  consciousness  and  sense  perception  and  is  the  essence  of 
consciousness;  and  spirit  is  the  pure,  unsullied  substance  of  life,  its  stable  and 
autonomous essence; so too, the physical and spiritual life of Muhammad (UWBP) is 
the distilled quintessence of the life and spirit of the universe; and the messengership 
of  Muhammad  (UWBP)  is  the  very  purest  essence  distilled  from  the  senses, 
consciousness, and intelligence of the universe. Indeed, the physical and spiritual life 
of  Muhammad  (UWBP),  is,  through  the  testimony  of  its works,  the  very  life  of the 
universe’s  life.  And  Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  messengership  is  the  consciousness  and 
light of the universe’s consciousness. While the Qur’anic revelation, according to the 
testimony of its living truths, is the spirit of the universe’s life and the intelligence of 
its consciousness. 

Yes,  yes,  yes!  If  the  light  of  Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  messengership  were  to 
depart  from  the  universe,  the  universe  would  die.  If  the  Qur’an  were  to  depart,  the 
universe  would  go  mad,  the  earth  would  lose  its  head  and  its  reason;  it  would  even 
strike its now unconscious head on a planet and Doomsday would occur. 

Life  also  looks  to  the  pillar  of  belief  in  divine  determining  and  proves  it 
indirectly. Because, since life is the light of the Manifest World, and it dominates it, 
and is the result and aim of existence, and since it is the most comprehensive mirror 
of  the  Creator  of  the  universe  and  the  most  perfect  sample  and  index  of  dominical 
activity, and – let there be no mistake in the comparison – is like a sort of programme; 
for sure, the mystery of life necessitates that the creatures in the World of the Unseen, 
that is, the past and the future, that is, that have been and will come, are predisposed 
to  conform  to  order,  regularity,  being  known  and  observed,  specific  individual 
existence, and the creative commands, which are their lives in one respect. 

The original seed of a tree and its root, as well as the seeds contained in its fruit 

and final outcome, all manifest a sort of life no less than the tree  

 

430

itself; indeed, they bear within themselves laws of life more subtle than those of the 
tree. Similarly, the seeds and roots left by  last autumn, before the present  spring, as 
well as the seeds and roots that will be left to subsequent springs after this spring has 
departed – they all bear the manifestations of life, just like this spring, and are subject 
to the laws of life. In just the same way, all the branches and twigs of the cosmic tree 
each have a past and a future. They have a chain consisting of past and future stages 
and  circumstances.  The  multiple  existences  and  stages  of  each  species  and  each 
member  of  each  species,  existing  in  divine  knowledge,  forms  a  chain  of  being  in 
God’s knowledge, and like its external existence, its existence in God’s knowledge is 
a  manifestation  of  universal  life  that  draws  all  the  aspects  of  its  life  from  these 
meaningful and vital Tablets of divine determining. 

The fact that the World of Spirits – which is one form of the World of the Unseen 
–  is  full  of  the  essence  of  life,  the  matter  of  life,  and  the  spirits,  which  are  the 
substances and essence of life, of a certainty demands and requires that the past and 
future – which are another form of the World of the Unseen and its second segment – 
should also receive the manifestation of life. 

In  addition,  the  perfect  order,  the  meaningful  circumstances  and  vital  fruits  and 
stages inherent in the existence of a thing within God’s knowledge, also demonstrate 
the  manifestation  of  a  sort  of  life.  Such  a  manifestation  of  life,  which  is  the  light 
emitted  by  the  sun  of  eternal  life,  cannot  be  limited  to  this  Manifest  World,  this 
present  time,  this  external  existence.  On  the  contrary,  each  world  receives  the 
manifestation  of  that  light  in  accordance  with  its  capacity,  and  the  cosmos  together 
with  all  its  worlds  is  alive  and  illumined  through  it.  Otherwise,  as  the  misguided 
imagine,  beneath  a  temporary  and  apparent  life,  each  world  would  be  a  vast  and 
terrible corpse, a dark ruin. 

One broad aspect of the pillar of belief in divine determining and decree is, then, 
understood  through  the  mystery  of  life  and  is  established  by  it.  Just  as  the  life  and 
vitality  of  the  Manifest  World  and  existent,  visible  objects  become  apparent  from 
their  orderliness  and  the  consequences  of  their  existence,  so  too  past  and  future 
creatures – regarded as belonging to the World of the  Unseen – have an  immaterial 
existence and sort of life, and a spiritual presence in God’s knowledge. The trace of 
this life and presence is made manifest and known by means of the Tablet of divine 
determining and decree and through all the stages and circumstances of their external 
lives and existences. 

 

431

FIFTH SIGN 

Also, it was said concerning the sixteenth property of life that when life enters a 
thing,  it  makes  it  into  a  world;  if  a  part,  it  affords  it  the  comprehensiveness  of  a 
whole; if a particular, the extensiveness of a universal. 

Yes,  life  possesses  such  extensiveness  it  is  simply  a  comprehensive  mirror  of 
divine oneness, showing in itself most of the divine names manifested throughout the 
universe. When life enters a body, it makes it a small world; like a sort of seed of the 
tree of the universe, containing an index of it. In the same way that a seed can only be 
the work of a power capable of making the tree that bears it, the one who creates the 
tiniest living beings has to be the Creator of all the universe. 

Thus, through this comprehensiveness, life demonstrates in itself a most obscure 
mystery  of  divine  oneness.  That  is,  like  the  mighty  sun  is  present  with  its  light, 
reflection, and seven colours in every drop of water and fragment of glass facing it, so 
the divine names and attributes which encompass the universe are manifested together 
in all  living beings. From this point of  view,  in regard to creation and dominicality, 
life makes the universe into an indivisible whole, a universal whose being broken into 
parts and in which others can share is outside the bounds of possibility. 

Yes, the stamp on your face shows self-evidently that the One who creates you is 
the One who creates all  humankind. For the nature of man’s creation  is the  same; it 
cannot  be  split  up.  Also,  by  means  of  life  the  parts  of  the  universe  are  like  the 
individual members of mankind, and the universe, like the species. It shows the seal 
of divine oneness and stamp of eternal besoughtedness on every individual, the same 
as it shows them on the whole, thus in every way repulsing the associating of partners 
with God. 

Also,  there  are  such  extraordinarily  wondrous  miracles  of  dominical  art  in  life 
that  one,  a  power,  that  cannot  create  the  whole  universe  cannot  create  the  tiniest 
animate creature. Yes, a pen that inscribes in a tiny seed the index of the huge pine-
tree, and the programme of its life, like writing the whole Qur’an in a chickpea, can 
surely be none other than the pen that writes the heavens together with the stars. And 
the  one  who  places  in  the  tiny  head  of  a  bee  the  ability  and  faculties  to  know  the 
flowers in the garden of the universe, be connected with most of its realms, convey a 
gift  of  divine  mercy  like  honey,  and  know  on  the  day  it  comes  into  the  world  the 
conditions of life, can surely be none other than the Creator of the entire universe. 

I n  S h o r t : Life is a shining seal of divine unity on the face of the  

 

432

universe;  and  in  respect  of life  all  beings  with  spirits  are  stamps  of  divine  oneness; 
and  the  embroideries  and  art  in  every  living  being  form  a  seal  of  eternal 
besoughtedness;  and  living  creatures  set  their  signatures  with  their  lives  on  the 
missive  of  the  universe  in  the  name  of  the  Ever-Living  and  Self-Subsistent  One  to 
their number, and are seals of divine unity, stamps of divine oneness, and signets of 
divine eternal besoughtedness. Similarly,  just as  all  living beings are  seals of divine 
unity in this book of the universe, like life; so a seal of divine oneness has been placed 
of the faces and features of each. 

Furthermore, just as life forms signatures and seals testifying to the unity of the 
Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One to the number of its particulars and of animate 
beings, the act of raising and restoring to life also puts signatures to divine unity to the 
number  of  beings.  For  example,  the  raising  to  life  of  the  earth,  which  is  a  single 
individual, testifies to divine unity as brilliantly as the sun. For in the raising to life of 
the  earth  in  spring,  three  hundred  thousand  species  and  the  species’  innumerable 
individual members are restored to life one within the other, without fault or defect, in 
perfect, regular order. The one who performs a single act such as that together with 
innumerable other orderly acts must surely be the Creator of all beings and the Ever-
Living  and  Self-Subsistent  One,  and  the  Single  One  of  Unity  any  partnership  in 
whose dominicality is impossible. 

For now, this small number of life’s properties has been described briefly, and we 
refer the explanation and detailed discussion of its other properties to the Risale-i Nur 
and to another time. 

 

433

Conclusion 

The greatest name is not the same for everyone; it differs. For example, for Imam 
‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) it was the six names Single, Ever-Living, Self-
Subsistent, Sapient, All-Just, and Most Holy. For Imam al-A‘zam, it was two names; 
Sapient  and  All-Just.  While  for  Ghawth  al-A‘zam  it  was  Ever-Living.  For  Imam 
Rabbani,  the  greatest  name  was  Self-Subsistent,  and  so  on;  many  other  people  held 
different names to be the greatest name. 

In connection with this Fifth Point being about the name Ever-Living, as both a 
blessing, and a witness, and an  evidence, and as  a sacred proof, and as a prayer for 
ourselves, and as a happy conclusion to this treatise, we include the following, uttered 
by  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  in  the  supreme 
supplication  called  al-Jaushan  al-Kabir,  which  shows  the  extremely  elevated  and 
comprehensive degree of his knowledge of God. We shall travel in the imagination to 
that time and saying “Amen” to what the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings 
and peace) said, shall utter the same supplication with  his  voice  as though saying it 
ourselves: 

O He who was living before all living beings; 
O He who shall live after all living beings; 
O Living One whom no living being resembles; 
O Living One whom nothing is like; 
O Living One who needs no other living being; 
O Living One who takes no living being as partner; 
O Living One who causes all living beings to die; 
O Living One who provides the sustenance of all living beings; 
O Living One who restores to life the dead; 
O Living One whom death touches not —  
Glory  be  unto  You!  There  is  no  god  but  You!  Mercy!  Mercy!  Deliver  us  from 

Hell-fire! Amen!  

 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

434

THE SIXTH POINT 
The Divine Name Self-Subsistent 

[This  point  discusses  the  divine  name  Self-Subsistent.  It  is  a
summary of the Fifth Point about the name Ever-Living, is an
addendum to Nur Çeşmesi (The Fountainhead of Light), and is
also  considered  appropriate  to  be  an  Addendum  to  the
Thirtieth Word.] 

       An Apology 

These  important  matters  concerning  the  profound,  comprehensive  greatest
manifestation  of  the  name  of  Self-Subsistent  occurred  to  me  as  separate
flashes and are therefore not well-arranged. They have moreover remained in
the  form  of  an  ill-arranged,  speedily  written  uncorrected  rough  copy.  For
these  reasons  many  deficiencies  and  much  disorderliness  are  bound  to  be
apparent in the phraseology and manner of expression. You must forgive my
defects for the sake of the beauties of the matters discussed. 

A Reminder 

The  points  concerning  the  greatest  name  are  comprehensive  to  the  utmost
degree  and  also  extremely  profound,  especially  the  matters  concerned  with
the  name  of  Self-Subsistent,  as  are  those  of  the  First  Ray  in  particular.1 
Furthermore since these latter look to the materialists and have penetrated the
subject  to  an  even  greater  degree,  everyone  will  not  be  able  to  understand
every matter in all its aspects. They will, however, be able to grasp a part of
each  matter.  According  to  the  rule  of  “A  thing  should  not  be  abandoned
completely  even  if  it  is  not  wholly  obtained,”  it  is  not  reasonable  to  leave
aside  such  a    matter  altogether,  saying:  “I  cannot  pick  all  the  fruits  in  this
immaterial garden.” Whatever the amount of fruit a person can pick,  it will
be  of  benefit.  For  just  as  the  matters  connected  with  the  greatest  name  are
extensive  to  a degree  beyond  comprehension,  so are  they  also  subtle  to the
degree the mind cannot distinguish them. Not everyone’s mind will reach the
Fifth  and  Sixth  Points  concerning  the  names  of  Ever-Living  and  Self-
Subsistent,  in  particular  the  allusions  of  life  to  the  pillars  of  belief  and
particularly to the pillar of divine determining and decree in the Fifth Point,
but  

                                                  

1 If the person reading this treatise does not have a knowledge of science, he should not begin

with the First Ray, but with the Second and should read the First at the end. 

 

435

they  will  not  remain  without  some  share  of  them  and  in  any  event  these 
matters  will  strengthen  their  belief.  The  importance  of  strengthening  belief, 
the key to eternal happiness, is truly tremendous. Even an iota’s increase is a 
treasure.  Imam  Rabbani,  Ahmad  al-Faruqi,  said:  “In  my  view,  increase  in 
only  a  small  aspect  of  belief  is preferable  to  hundreds of  illuminations  and 
spiritual delights.” 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
In  Whose  hand  is  the  dominion  of  all  things.(36:83)  *  To  Him  belong  the 
keys of the heavens and the earth.(39:63; 42:12) * And there is nothing but 
with  Us  are  its  treasuries.(15:21)  *  There  is  not a  moving  creature but  He 
has grasp of its forelock.(11:56) 

Imparted  to  my  mind  during  the  month  of  Dhi’l-Qa‘da  was  a  point  concerning 
verses like these that allude to divine Self-Subsistence, a greatest manifestation of the 
name  Self-Subsistent,  which  is  either  the  greatest  name,  or  the  second  of  the  two 
lights  of  the  greatest  name,  or  the  sixth  of  its  six  lights.  My  situation  in  Eskişehir 
Prison  does  not  allow  me  to  explain  that  greatest  light  fully.  However,  Imam  ‘Ali 
(May God be pleased with him) expounded the greatest name in his ode Arjuza under 
the exalted name of Sakina, and in his ode Jaljalutiyya he considered these six names 
contained within the greatest name together with some other sublime names, and said 
they were the greatest and most important. I have received extraordinary consolation 
from his discussion of them. And so, similarly to the preceeding five names, we shall 
allude to the name Self-Subsistent, to that greatest light, with five rays  in what  is at 
the very least an abbreviated form. 

FIRST RAY 

The universe’s Glorious Creator is Self-Subsistent, that is, He subsists, continues, 
endures  of  Himself.  All  things  subsist  and  continue  through  Him,  they  remain  in 
existence  and  have  permanence.  If  the  relationship of  Self-Subsistence  were  cut  off 
from the universe for even the fraction of a second, the universe would be annihilated. 
Furthermore,  as  the  Qur’an  of  Mighty  Stature  decrees,  together  with  the  All-

Glorious One’s Self-Subsistence, 

There is nothing that is like unto Him.(42:11) 

That is, He has  no like, equal, peer, or partner in either His essence, or His attributes, 
or  His  actions.  Indeed,  it  is  not  possible  for  the  Most  and  Holy  One  who  holds  the 
universe with its circumstances and functions in the  

 

436

grasp  of  His  dominicality  and  regulates,  administers,  sustains  and  nurtures  it  with 
perfect order as though it were a house or a palace to have any like, equal, partner, or 
peer; it is impossible. 

Yes, it is indeed impossible that the All-Glorious Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent 
One for whom the creation of the stars is as easy as that of particles; to whose power 
the greatest thing is subjugated as is the most minute; for whom nothing is an obstacle 
to  any  other  thing  and  no  action  obstructs  any  other  action;  in  whose  view 
innumerable  individuals  are  present  in  the  same  way  that  a  single  individual  is 
present; who hears all voices simultaneously and is able to answer the limitless needs 
of  all  simultaneously;  outside  the  sphere  of  whose  will  and  volition  is  nothing,  no 
state,  as  is  testified  to  by  the  order  and  balance  of  the  beings  in  the  universe;  who 
although He is in no place, is present everywhere through His power and knowledge; 
and although everything is utterly distant from Him, is utterly close to them – that He 
should  have  any  like,  equal,  partner,  deputy,  opposite  or  peer  is  not  possible;  it  is 
impossible.  His  sacred  qualities  and  attributes  can  be  considered  only  through 
allegory and comparison. All the comparisons and allegories in the Risale-i Nur are of 
this sort. 

Yes,  the  Most  Pure  and  Holy  One  is  without  like,  necessarily  existent,  utterly 
remote from matter, and beyond space; His fragmentation and division are impossible 
in every respect as is any sort of change or alteration; His being needy or impotent is 
beyond  the  bounds  of  possibility.  And  yet,  a  group  of  the  people  of  misguidance 
suppose  certain  manifestations  of  the  Most  Pure  and  Holy  Essence  which  are 
manifested in the pages of the universe and in the levels of beings to be the Most Pure 
and  Holy  One  Himself  and  ascribe  the  decrees  of  the  divinity  to  certain  creatures; 
they attribute some of the All-Glorious One’s works to nature. 

However,  it  is  demonstated  with  conclusive  proofs  in  numerous  places  in  the 
Risale-i Nur that nature is a divine art, and cannot be the artist. It is a dominical book, 
and cannot be the scribe. It is an embroidery, and cannot be the embroiderer. It is a 
register,  and  cannot  be  the  accountant.  It  is  a  law,  and  cannot  be  the  power.  It  is  a 
pattern,  and  cannot be  the  source.  It  is  a  recipient  and is passive,  and  cannot  be  the 
author. It is an order, and cannot the orderer. It is a code of creation, and cannot be the 
establisher of the code. 

If, to suppose the impossible, the tiniest animate creature was referred to nature 
and it was told: “You made this;” as is demonstrated in many places  in the Risale-i 
Nur  with  decisive  proofs,  it  would  be  necessary  to  provide  moulds,  or  rather 
machines,  to  the  number of  the  tiny  creature’s  members  and  bodily  systems  so  that 
nature could carry out the work. 

 

437

Moreover,  although  a  group  of  the  people  of  misguidance  called  materialists 
perceived a greatest manifestation of divine creativity and dominical power within the 
orderly transformations of minute particles, since they did not know from where the 
manifestation  came  and  could  not  understand  from  where  that  universal  force  was 
being  directed,  which  originated  from  the  manifestation  of  the  Eternally  Besought 
One’s power, they supposed matter and force were pre-eternal and began to attribute 
the divine works to particles and their motion. Glory be to God! Could human beings 
be  so  ignorant  as  to  attribute  actions  and  works  that  can  only be carried out by  one 
who is both beyond space and present  in such a  way  as to see,  know, and direct all 
things in the creation of all things everywhere, to particles and their motion, which are 
tossed around in the storms of lifeless, blind, unconscious chance that lacks will and 
balance?  Anyone  who  possesses  even  a  jot  of  intelligence  must  see  just  what  an 
ignorant and superstitious idea this is. 

Indeed, because those wretches have abandoned absolute unity, they have fallen 
into  a  limitless,  endless  absolute  multiplicity.  That  is,  since  they  do  not  accept  one 
single God, they are compelled to accept endless gods. Which means that since they 
are unable to squeeze into their corrupted minds the idea of one single Most Pure and 
Holy  Essence  and  the  pre-eternity  and  creativity  that  are  necessary  and  essential  to 
Him,  they  are  compelled  by  their  opinions  to  accept  the  pre-eternity,  indeed  the  
divinity, of those limitless, endless, lifeless particles. 

So,  come  and  consider  this  complete  and  utter  ignorance!  For  certainly,  the 
manifestation  on  particles  has  made  that  mass  of  particles  into  an  orderly  and 
magnificent  army  through  the  strength,  power,  and  command  of  the  Necessarily 
Existent  One.  If  the  Commander-in-Chief’s  command  and  power  were  withdrawn 
even  for  a  second,  that  numerous,  lifeless,  unconscious  mass  would degenerate  into 
irregular soldiers, it would altogether cease to exist. 

Furthermore, it is as if another group of people see even further, that is, they are 
even more ignorantly misguided. They  imagine the matter known as ether, which  is 
an  extremely  subtle,  fine,  obedient  and  subjugated  page  of  the  Glorious  Maker’s 
activities, a means for the transmitting of His commands, a flimsy veil for the exercise 
of His power, a refined ink for His writing, a fine raiment for His creating, a leaven of 
His artefacts and a tillage for His seeds, to be the origin and the author because it acts 
as a mirror to the manifestation of His dominicality. 

This  extraordinary  ignorance  requires  endless  impossibilities  because  ether  is 

matter that is unconscious, lifeless and without will and is finer  

 

438

than  the  matter  of  which  particles  consist,  which  drowns  the  materialists,  and  is 
denser than the index of primordial matter into which the ancient philosophers thrust 
themselves. To attribute to this matter, which may be fragmented and divided without 
limit and is equipped with the qualities and duties of being passive and the ability to 
transmit – to attribute to its minute particles, which are  far minuter than particles of 
other  matter,  the  actions  and  works  that  exist  through  a  will  and  power  that  sees, 
knows,  and  directs  all  things  in  all  things  is  mistaken  to  the  number  of  particles  of 
ether. 

The  act  of  creation  apparent  in  beings  is  such  that  it  demonstrates  it  proceeds 
from a power and will which sees and knows most things, the whole universe even, in 
each thing particularly if it is animate, and which recognizes and secures the animate 
creature’s relationship with the universe; it thus demonstrates that it cannot be the act 
of causes, which are material and are not all-encompassing. Through the meaning of 
Self-Subsistence,  a  particular  creative  act  bears  a  mighty  meaning  that  points  to  its 
being directly the act of the Creator of the universe. For example, an act pertaining to 
the creation of a bee demonstrates that it is peculiar to the Creator of the universe in 
two respects. 

First Respect: The  fact that all the other bees throughout the world resembling 
that  particular  bee  manifest  the  same  act  at  the  same  time  demonstrates  that  the 
particular and individual act is the tip of a comprehensive act which embraces the face 
of the earth. In which case, whoever the author and owner of that vast act  is, he must 
be the author of the particular act. 

Second  Respect:  In  order  to  be  the  author  of  the  action  directed  towards  the 
creation of the bee in question, a power and will are necessary that are vast enough to 
know  and  secure  the  conditions  for  the  life  of  the  bee,  and  its  members,  and  its 
relationship with the universe. Therefore, the one who performs the particular action 
can only perform it thus perfectly by having authority over most of the universe. 

Hence  the  most  particular  and  insignificant  action  demonstrates  in  two  respects 

that it is peculiar to the Creator of all things. 

The  most  remarkable  and  surprising  thing  is  this:  the  Necessarily  Existent  One 
possesses  necessity,  which  is  the  firmest  level  of  existence;  absolute  isolation  from 
matter,  which  is  the  most  immutable  degree  of  existence;  absolute  freedom  from 
space, which is the state of existence furthest from cessation; and unity, which is the 
soundest  quality  of  existence  and  the  one  remotest  from  change  and  non-existence. 
And  yet  they  attribute  pre-eternity  and  everlastingness,  which  are  the  Necessarily 
Existent  One’s  most  particular  qualities  and  are  necessary  and  essential  to  Him,  to 
things like ether and particles, which are matter that is material, unbounded and  

 

439

numerous,  is  the  least  stable  level  of  existence  and  the  least  tangible,  the  most 
changing  and  the  most  varying  and  the  most  dispersed  through  space;  they  ascribe 
pre-eternity to them and fancy them to be pre-eternal; and some of them even suppose 
that  it  is  out  of  them  that  the  divine  works  arise.  It  has  been  demonstrated  through 
cogent arguments in many places in the Risale-i Nur how contrary to truth and reality, 
how unreasonable and absurd, is this idea. 

SECOND RAY 

This consists of two matters. 

F i r s t  M a t t e r : 

Neither  sleep  overcomes  Him nor  slumber.(2:255)  *  There  is  not a  moving 
creature but He has grasp of its forelock.(11:56) * To Him belong the keys of 
the heavens and the earth.(39:63; 42:12) 

These verses point to a greatest manifestation of the name Self-Subsistent. One aspect 
of the mighty truth that these and verses like them indicate is as follows: 

The  existence,  continuance,  and  perpetuation  of  the  heavenly  bodies  in  the 
universe  are  tied  to  the  mystery  of  Self-Subsistence.  If  the  manifestation  of  Self-
Subsistence were to avert its  face  for a moment, millions of globes, some of them a 
thousand times larger than the earth, would be scattered into the infinite void of space, 
and colliding with one another would crash into nothingness. 

For example, the power of the Self-Subsistence of the One who keeps thousands 
of stately palaces in place in perfect order and makes them travel like aircraft through 
space  is  measured  through  the  stability,  order,  and  continuance  of  those  palaces  in 
space. So too a measure of the greatest manifestation of the name Self-Subsistent are 
the  facts  that the  All-Glorious  and  Self-Subsistent  One bestows  on  the  innumerable 
heavenly  bodies  within  ethereal  matter  a  stability,  permanence,  and  continuance 
within  the  utmost  order  and  balance  through  the  mystery  of  Self-Subsistence;  and 
together  with  upholding  without  prop  or  support  in  the  void  millions  of  mighty 
globes, some a thousand and some even a million times larger than the earth, entrusts 
them  all with  duties  and  causes them to  submit  in  perfect  obedience  like  a  majestic 
army to the decrees proceeding from the command of “‘Be!’ and it is.” The particles 
of all beings also exist, like the stars, through the mystery of Self-Subsistence, and are 
permanent and continue through it. 

The particles in an animate creature’s body do not disperse but are assembled in 

groups and systems peculiar to each limb, and without  

 

440

scattering, preserve their position within the storms of the elements, which flow like 
floods,  and  remain  regular  and  in  order.  Since  this  self-evidently  does  not  occur 
through themselves but through the mystery of Self-Subsistence, and since each body 
is  like  a  well-ordered  regiment  and  each species  like  a  regular  army,  these  particles 
proclaim the mystery of Self-Subsistence with innumerable tongues in the same way 
that  the  continuance  and  motion  of  animate  creatures  and  their  assemblages  on  the 
earth and that of the stars in the world of space proclaim it. 

S  e  c  o  n  d    M  a  t  t  e  r  :  This  station  requires  that  some  of  the  benefits  and 
instances  of  wisdom  in  things  connected  with  the  mystery  of  Self-Subsistence  are 
pointed out.  

The wisdom in the existence of things, and the aims of their natures, the benefits 

in their creation, and the results of their lives are of three sorts. 

The First Sort looks to each thing itself and to man and to man’s affairs. 
The Second Sort is more important. It is the meanings of all things being set out 
for  innumerable  readers,  for  each  is  a  sign,  a  missive,  a  book,  an  ode  for  conscious 
beings  to  study,  an  indication  making  known  the  manifestation  of  the  Glorious 
Creator’s names. 

The Third Sort: This concerns the Glorious Maker and looks to Him. While one 
of the benefits and results of things  look to the things themselves, countless look to 
the Glorious Maker. For the Glorious Maker beholds the wonders of His art Himself, 
He  observes  the  manifestation  of  His  names  in  the  beings  which  He  Himself  has 
fashioned. In regard to this mighty third sort, it is sufficient if beings live only for a 
second. 

Another mystery of Self-Subsistence that requires the existence of all things will 

be explained in the Third Ray. 

At  one  time  I  was  investigating  the  talisman  of  the  universe  and  riddle  of 
creation, which lies in its being a manifestation, together with the instances of wisdom 
and benefits in beings, and I asked: “I wonder why these things display themselves in 
this way, then swiftly vanish and are lost? I look at their individual features; they have 
been attired, decked out and adorned in an orderly, purposeful fashion and sent to this 
display  and  exhibition.  But  then  they  disappear  in  a  day  or  two,  and  some  of  them 
within a few minutes; uselessly and in vain they vanish. What is the purpose in their 
being seen by us for this brief time?” I was most curious. 

Then, through divine favour, I discovered an important instance of wisdom in the 
fact that beings, in particular animate beings, come into the place of instruction that is 
this  world.  It  was  as  follows:  each  being,  and  especially  if  it  is  animate,  is  an 
extremely meaningful word, missive, dominical ode  

 

441

and divine proclamation. After it has been studied by intelligent beings and has stated 
its  meaning  to  innumerable  readers,  its  corporeal  form,  which  is  like  a  letter  or  a 
word, disappears. 

For  about  a  year this  instance  of  wisdom  was  sufficient  for  me.  Then  the  truly 
wonderful and subtle miracles of art to be found in creatures, in particular in animate 
beings, were disclosed. I understood that these subtleties of art which are so fine and 
wonderful are not only to set forth meanings  for the  gazes of  intelligent beings. For 
although  innumerable  such  creatures  may  study  each  being,  their  studying  is  both 
limited, and not all of them will be able to penetrate all the subtleties of art in those 
animate  beings.  That  is  to  say,  the  most  important  result  of the  creation  of  animate 
beings and the most significant purpose of their natures is to present to the Pre-Eternal 
Self-Subsistent  One’s  own  gaze  the  marvels  of  His  art  and  the  compassionate  gifts 
and bounties He has bestowed. 

As for this purpose, it satisfied me for a long time and from it I understood the 
following:  the  wisdom  and  purpose  of  creation,  which  is  to  present  the  endless 
subtleties  of  art  in  beings,  particularly  in  animate  beings,  to  the  gaze  of  the  Pre-
Eternally  Self-Subsistent  One,  that  is,  for  He  Himself  to  behold  His  own  art,  was 
sufficient for that vast outlay. 

Some time later I realized that the subtleties of art in the individual features and 
forms  of  beings  did  not  continue;  they  were  being  renewed  and  were  undergoing 
change  at  great  speed;  they  were  being  transformed  within  an  endless  activity  and 
creativity.  I  started  to  ponder  over  it,  saying:  “The  wisdom  in  this  creativity  and 
activity  must  necessarily  be  as  extensive  as  the  activity  itself.”  Then,  the  two 
instances  of  wisdom  mentioned  above  began  to  seem  insufficient;  they  lacked 
something.  With  extreme curiosity  I  began  to  search and  seek  for  a  further  purpose 
and instance of wisdom. 

All  praise  be  to  God,  through  the  effulgence  of  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous 
Exposition, after some time a vast, limitless wisdom and purpose became apparent at 
the  level  of  the  mystery  of  Self-Subsistence.  And    through  it,  the  divine  mystery 
called  the  talisman  of  the  universe  and  riddle  of  creation  was  understood.  It  is 
explained  in  detail  in  the  Twenty-Fourth  Letter,  so  here  in  the  Third  Ray  we  shall 
briefly mention only two or three points. 

Look  from  this  point  to  the  manifestation  of  the  mystery  of  Self-Subsistence: it 
has  plucked  all  beings  out  of  non-existence,  and  according  to  the  meaning  of  the 
verse, 

It  is  God  who  has  raised  the  heavens  without  any  supports  that  you  can 
see,(13:2) 

 

442

has caused each one of them to remain in infinite space. It has bestowed stability and 
permanence on them, and caused them all to display the manifestation of the mystery 
of Self-Subsistence. If not for this support, nothing at all could continue to exist of its 
own accord. Everything would topple over into the infinite void and tumble into non-
existence. 

Furthermore,  just  as  all beings  rely  on  the  All-Glorious Self-Subsistent  One  for 
their existence, stability, and permanence, they continue in existence through Him, so 
according to the meaning of the verse, 

And to Him goes back every affair,(11:123) 

the  tips  of  thousands  of  chains  or  lines  in  the  states  and  conditions  of  beings  are 
fastened to the mystery of Self-Subsistence, which, if the comparison is not mistaken, 
is like the centre or central pole of telephone and telegraph lines. If they did not rely 
on that luminous point of support, thousands of unending sequences of causes would 
be necessary, which according to scholars  is  an  impossible and false  notion;  in  fact, 
there would have to be as many of these absurd unending sequences of causes as there 
are beings. For example, one thing – protection or light or existence or sustenance, for 
instance – in one respect relies on the next thing, and that on the next, and that on the 
next, until finally since it cannot be infinite, it has to come to an end. 

Thus,  the  end  of  all  such  lines  and  sequences  lies  in  the  mystery  of  Self-
Subsistence. But when this mystery has been understood, the links and the meaning of 
each  thing  relying  on  the  next  in  those  imaginary  sequences  do  not  remain,  they 
disappear and everything is seen to look directly to the mystery of Self-Subsistence. 

THIRD RAY 

By means of one or two introductory points, we shall point out to a small degree 
the  disclosure  of  the  mystery  of  Self-Subsistence  within  divine  creativity  and 
dominical activity, which verses like the following allude to: 

Every  day  He  manifests  Himself  in  yet  another  way.(55:29)  *  A  sovereign 
doer of whatever He wills.(11:107) * He creates whatever he wishes.(30:34, 
etc.) * In Whose hand is the dominion of all things.(36:83) * So look to the 
signs of God’s mercy, how He restores the earth to life after its death.(30:50) 

T h e  F i r s t : When we look at the universe, we see that one group of creatures, 
which are tossed around in the flood of time and follow on one after the other convoy 
after convoy, come for a second and then immediately  

 

443

vanish. Another group comes for a minute and then passes on. One species stops by in 
the Manifest Word for an hour, then enters the  World of the Unseen. Some of them 
come and alight in the Manifest World for a day, some of them for a year, some for a 
century, and some for an age; they perform their duties and then depart. 

This astonishing travelling and passage of beings and flow and flux of creatures 
is  driven  and  directed  with  such  order,  balance  and  wisdom,  and  the  one  who 
commands them and those convoys does so with such insight, purpose and planning 
that  even  if  all  minds  were  to  unite  and  become  one  mind,  it  would  be  unable  to 
comprehend the essence of this wise direction; it would be unable to find any fault in 
it and so could not criticize it.  

Thus, within this dominical activity, not allowing any of those pleasing creatures 
that  it  loves,  especially  animate  creatures,  to  open  their  eyes,  the  pen  of  divine 
determining and decree despatches them to the World of the Unseen;  not permitting 
them  even  to  draw  a  breath,  it  discharges  them  from  the  life  of  this  world.  It 
continuously  fills  the  guesthouse  of  the  world  and  empties  it  without  the  guests’ 
consent. Making the globe of the earth like a slate for writing and erasing, through the 
manifestation of 

He grants life and deals death,(2:258)  

the  pen  of  divine  determining  and  decree  ceaselessly  inscribes  writings  on  it,  and 
renews and replaces them. 

One meaning of the wisdom in this dominical activity and divine creativity and a 
fundamental requirement and a motive cause of them  is a  limitless, endless  instance 
of wisdom that may be divided into three important branches. 

The  First  Branch  of  that  wisdom  is  this:  Every  sort  of  activity,  whether 
particular  or  universal,  yields  pleasure.  There  is  a  pleasure  in  all  activity.  Indeed, 
activity is pure pleasure. Yes, activity is the manifestation of existence, which is pure 
pleasure  and  is  the  shaking  off  and  becoming  distant  from  non-existence,  which  is 
pure suffering. 

Everyone with ability  follows with pleasure the unfolding of  his ability through 
activity.  The  revealing  of  innate  talents  through  activity  arises  from  a  pleasure  and 
results in a pleasure. Everyone who possesses some perfections follows with pleasure 
their disclosure through activity. 

Since  there  is  present  in  every  activity  a  perfection  and  pleasure  which  is  thus 
loved and sought after, and activity too is a perfection; and since there are apparent in 
the  world  of  animate  creatures  the  manifestations  of  a  boundless  love  and  infinite 
compassion  which  arise  from  a  perpetual  and  pre-eternal  life;  those  manifestations 
show that as the requirement of that  

 

444

eternal Life which is fitting for the necessary existence of the One who thus loves and 
is compassionate and makes Himself loved, and is worthy of His holiness, there are – 
if the terms are not mistaken – at the utmost level such sacred qualities in that Most 
Pure  and  Holy  Life  as  divine  passion,  hallowed  love,  and  sheer  pleasure.  And  it  is 
these  qualities  that  continuously  renew,  agitate,  and  change  the  universe  through 
endless activity and infinite creativity. 

The Second Branch of the wisdom in the limitless divine activity which looks 
to the mystery of Self-Subsistence: This looks to the divine names. It is well-known 
that  everyone  who  possesses  beauty  wants  to  both  see  and  display  his  beauty;  that 
everyone who possesses some skills desires and loves to attract attention to his skills 
by  exhibiting  and  proclaiming  them;  he  desires  and  loves  his  skill,  which  is  a 
beautiful truth and meaning that  has remained concealed, to be revealed and to find 
ardent admirers. 

These fundamental rules are in force in all things according to the degree of each. 
According to the testimony of the universe and the evidence of the manifestations and 
embroideries of the thousand and one most beautiful names of the All-Glorious Self-
Subsistent One, who possesses absolute beauty, there are  in every degree of each of 
those  names  a  true  loveliness,  a  true  perfection,  a  true  beauty  and  a  most  exquisite 
truth.  Indeed,  in  every  degree  there  are  endless  different  sorts  of  loveliness  and 
innumerable beautiful truths. 

Since the beings of the universe are mirrors reflecting the sacred beauties of those 
names and the tableaux displaying their beautiful embroideries and the pages setting 
forth  their  beautiful  truths,  those  constant  and  eternal  names  will  entirely  and 
unceasingly  renew  and  change  the  universe  through  their  manifestations  as  a 
consequence of that sacred divine love and due to the mystery of Self-Subsistence. In 
this  way  they  will  display  their  endless  manifestations  and  infinite,  meaningful 
embroideries  and  books  both  to  the  witnessing  gaze  of  the  All-Glorious  Self-
Subsistent One, whom they signify, and to the studying gaze of uncountable numbers 
of intelligent creatures and creatures endowed with spirits, and will display countless 
tableaux  out  of  a  finite  and  limited  thing  and  numerous  individuals  out  of  a  single 
individual and multiple truths out of a single truth. 

FOURTH RAY 

The Third Branch of the wisdom in the constant and astonishing activity in 
the universe: Everyone who is compassionate is happy at giving pleasure to others; 
and everyone who is kind is gratified at making others happy; everyone who is loving 
is gladdened by pleasing others who are  

 

445

worthy of being pleased; and everyone who is noble-hearted takes pleasure at making 
others  happy;  everyone  who  is  just  rejoices  at  upholding  justice  and  at winning  the 
gratitude of those whose rights are vindicated by punishing the deserving; and every 
skilful craftsman takes pride in exhibiting his work, at its functioning as he hoped it 
would function, and at its giving the desired results. 

Thus,  each  of  the  above-mentioned  principles  is  a  fundamental  rule  which  is  in 
force  throughout  the  universe  and  the  world  of  mankind.  Three  examples 
demonstrating that these rules function in the divine names have been explained in the 
Third Stopping Place of the Thirty-Second Word. It is appropriate to write a summary 
of them at this point, so we say the following: 

For example, an extremely kind, generous, munificent, noble-hearted person who 
embarks the poor and needy on a large ship, gratifies them with banquets and bounties 
and sails it in the seas around the world, will watch them happily since he is superior 
to  them,  take  pleasure  at  those  needy  people’s  gratitude,  rejoice  and  be  pleased  at 
their taking pleasure, and feel proud. 

If someone who is merely a distribution official takes such pleasure and delight at 
holding  an  insignificant  banquet,  consider  the  following:  the  Ever-Living  and  Self-
Subsistent  One  embarks  all  animals  and  men  and  countless  angels,  jinn  and  spirit 
beings on the ship of the earth, which is a vessel of that All-Merciful One; He spreads 
the face of the earth before them as a dominical  table laden with  varieties of foods, 
and with delights and sustenance  for all the senses; he causes those needy, thankful, 
grateful and  happy creatures to sail the regions of the universe, and  not only makes 
them happy in this world with all these bounties but also makes the bounties tables in 
the  unending  banquets  in  the  Paradises  of  the  Eternal  Realm.  It  is  therefore  the 
meaning of dominicality alluded to by the divine qualities resulting from the thanks, 
gratitude, joy and delight of those creatures which look to the Ever-Living and Self-
Subsistent  One,  which  we  are  powerless  and  not  permitted  to  express,  like  holy 
pleasure, sacred pride, and hallowed delight that necessitate this constant activity and 
ceaseless creativity. 

And  for  example,  if  a  skilful  craftsman  builds  a  gramophone  that  requires  no 
records and it plays just as he wishes, how proud and delighted he will be; he will say 
to  himself:  “What  wonders  God  willed!”  Seeing  that  an  insignificant  piece  of  art  in 
which there is no true creation engenders a feeling of such pride and pleasure in the 
craftsman’s spirit, then consider the following: 

 

446

The All-Wise Maker creates the totality of the universe as a divine orchestra and 
wondrous  workshop  which  strikes  up  and  gives  forth  countless  sorts  of  songs  and 
hymns  praises  and  glorification;  He  displays  all  the  species,  all  the  worlds,  in  the 
universe through a different craft and different miracles of art; and not only does He 
fashion  many  machines  in  the  heads  of  animate  creatures,  each  like  a  gramophone, 
camera  or  telegraph,  He  also  fashions  in  the  heads  of  human  beings,  both  a 
gramophone without records, a camera without a film, a telegraph without wires, and 
a  machine  twenty  times  more  wonderful.  It  is  therefore  meanings  like  sacred  pride 
and  holy  pleasure  and  the  exalted  qualities  of  this  sort  which  proceed  from 
dominicality  and  arise  from  creating  such  machines,  and  their  functioning  in  the 
required way and producing the desired results that necessitate this unceasing activity. 
And  for  example,  a  just  ruler  takes  pleasure  and  is  gratified  and  feels  proud  at 
taking the part of the oppressed against tyrants in order to uphold justice, at protecting 
the poor against the wrongdoing of the powerful, and at giving to everyone  his due. 
Since this is a fundamental rule of rulership and justice, consider the following: 

The  Ever-Living  and  Self-Subsistent  One,  who  is  the  All-Wise  Ruler  and  is 
Absolutely  Just,  bestows on  creatures  and  especially  on  animate  ones  the  necessary 
conditions for life, which are known as the rights of life; and to preserve their lives, 
He grants them the necessary abilities and members; and He compassionately protects 
the weak from the evil of the powerful. Therefore, the dominical qualities and sacred 
meanings,  which  we  are  powerless  to  express,  that  arise  from  this  and  from  the 
execution  of  the  mystery  of  justice,  which  in  this  world  is  total  with  regard  to 
establishing  justice  for  all  animate  beings  and  partial  with  regard  to  punishing 
wrongdoers, and especially that arise from the manifestation of supreme justice at the 
supreme tribunal of the resurrection, necessitate the constant activity in the universe. 

Thus, as these three examples show, since each of the most beautiful names give 
rise to certain sacred divine qualities in this unceasing activity, they require unceasing 
creativity.  And  since  the  development,  unfolding  and  blossoming  of  abilities  and 
faculties  yield  a  joy,  expansiveness  and  pleasure;  and  since  on  the  performance  and 
completion  of  a  duty  and on  being released  from  it,  everyone  entrusted  with  such  a 
duty  experiences  a  feeling  of  relief  and  gratitude;  and  since  to  receive  many  fruits 
from  a  single  seed  and  to  gain  a  hundredfold  profit  from  a  single  thing  is  a  most 
pleasurable trade, then most certainly the One who causes the innumerable abilities of 
creatures to unfold, after employing the creatures in valuable duties,  

 

447

will  discharge  them,  but  to  a  higher  state.  That  is  to  say,  He  raises  elements  to  the 
level of minerals; minerals to plant life; plants to the level of animal life by means of 
sustenance; and animals to the high level of human life, which is conscious. 

It may be understood then just how important are the sacred meanings and divine 
dominicality arising from the constant activity and dominical creativity which, on the 
demise of their external existences, cause all animate creatures to leave behind them 
multiple  existences  taken  from  them,  like  their  spirits,  essences,  identities,  forms, 
existences in the Worlds of Similitudes, Knowledge, and the  Unseen, the  sheaths of 
their  spirits,  and  astral  bodies,  all  of  which  are  charged  with  duties  in  their  places. 
This is explained in the Twenty-Fourth Letter. 

A Decisive Answer to an Important Question 

One  group  of  the  people  of  misguidance  says  that  the  being  who  changes  and 
transforms the universe with this constant activity must himself be subject to change 
and alteration. 

T h e  A n s w e r : God forbid! A hundred thousand times, God forbid! The fact 
that mirrors on the ground change demonstrates not that the sun in the sky changes, 
but on the contrary that its manifestations are being renewed. Moreover, change and 
alteration are impossible in the Most Pure and Holy Essence, who is pre-eternal, post-
eternal, sempiternal, in every respect absolutely perfect and absolutely self-sufficient, 
totally free of, detached from, and beyond matter, space, restriction, and contingency. 
Change  in  the  universe  points  to  his  lack  of  change  and  alteration,  not  to  His 
changing. For one who causes constant change and causes numerous things to move 
must himself be unchanging and not move. 

For  example,  if  you  spin  a  large  number  of  globes  and  balls  which  have  each 
been tied to a piece of string and cause them all to move unceasingly within an order, 
you have to remain in one place and not change or move, for if you did, it would spoil 
the order. It is clear that one who causes objects to move within an order must himself 
not  move,  and  one  who  causes  objects  to  change  ceaselessly  must  himself  be 
unchanging so that these actions may continue in an orderly fashion. 

Secondly: Change and alteration arise  from createdness, from being renewed in 
order  to be perfected,  from  need,  materiality,  and  contingency.  Since  the  Most  Pure 
and  Holy  Essence  is  both  eternal,  and  in  every  respect  absolutely  perfect  and 
absolutely  self-sufficient, and totally detached from matter, and necessarily  existent, 
most certainly His changing and altering is not possible; it is impossible. 

 

448

FIFTH RAY 

F i r s t  M a t t e r  

If we wish to see the greatest manifestation of the name Self-Subsistent, we shall 
set up two telescopes in order to observe the whole universe with our imaginations. 
One of them will show the most distant objects, the other minute particles. So if we 
look through the first telescope, we see that through the manifestation of the name of 
Self-Subsistent  and  without  support,  of  millions  of  globes  and  stars  thousands  of 
times larger than the earth, some have been made apparently stationary in the matter 
known  as  ether,  which  is  subtler  than  air,  while  others  have  been  made  to  travel 
apparently as their duty. 

Then  we  look  through  the  second  telescope,  which  is  the  microscope  of  the 
imagination,  to  observe  minute  particles.  Through  the  mystery  of  Self-Subsistence, 
taking  up  orderly  positions  like  the  stars,  the  particles  of  the  bodies  of  animate 
creatures  on  the  earth  are  all  in  motion  and  performing  their  duties.  We  see  that 
especially  the  miniscule  agglomerations  forming  the  particles  known  as  red 
corpuscles and white corpuscles in the blood of animate beings, like the planets, move 
with two orderly motions like Mevlevi dervishes. 

A Summary2 

A summary is appropriate here in order to examine the sacred light the six names 
of  the  greatest  name  form, blending  together  like  the  seven  colours  in  light.  It  is  as 
follows: 

Look beyond  the  greatest  manifestation  of  the  name Self-Subsistent  which  thus 
upholds  and  gives  permanence  and  continuity  to  all  the  beings  in  the  universe:  the 
greatest manifestation of the name Ever-Living has set aflame all animate beings with 
its manifestation. It  has  illuminated the universe.  It  gilds all animate beings with  its 
manifestation. 

Now look again: beyond the name Ever-Living, the greatest manifestation of the 
name Single confers a unity on the universe with all its elements and parts. It puts a 
stamp of unity on each being’s forehead. It places a seal of oneness on each being’s 
face. It causes them to proclaim its manifestation with endless, countless tongues. 

Now consider the greatest manifestation of the name Sapient beyond  

                                                 

2 This is a brief summary of the six sacred names which bear the greatest name and are the basis 

and subject of the six main sections of the Thirtieth Flash. 

 

449

the  name  Single:  it  incorporates  in  a  fruitful  order,  wise  regularity  and  purposeful 
harmony appropriate to each all the beings we observe through the two telescopes of 
the  imagination,  from  stars  to  particles,  whether  universal  or  particular,  from  the 
greatest sphere to the most minute. It adorns and gilds all beings. 

Then look beyond the greatest manifestation of the name Sapient: in regard to its 
aspect that was examined in the Second Point, through the  greatest manifestation of 
the name All-Just, the universe with all its beings is administered with such balance, 
equilibrium  and  measure  within  unceasing  activity,  that  if  just  one  of  the  heavenly 
bodies were to lose its balance even for a second, that is, if it were to break free of the 
manifestation of the name All-Just, it would cause chaos among the stars; it would be 
like Doomsday. 

Thus, all beings and all the different realms of beings from the army of the stars 
to  the  army  of  minute  particles,  that  is,  from  the  largest  sphere  that  is  the  vast  belt 
known  as  the  Milky  Way  to  the  sphere  of  the  motion  of  red  and  white  corpuscles, 
stand shoulder to shoulder in a manner gauged with the finest balance and measure, so 
demonstrating  that  all  those  beings  are  obedient  and  totally  subjugated  to  the 
commands proceeding from the command of “‘Be!’ and it is.” 

Now look beyond the greatest manifestation of the Name All-Just to the greatest 
manifestation of the name Most Holy, which was explained in the First Point: the fact 
that  it renders all the beings  in the universe  so pure, clean, clear, beautiful, adorned 
and shining demonstrates that  it  has bestowed on the universe and on all beings the 
form  of  beautiful  mirrors  worthy  of  reflecting  the  utter  essential  beauty  of  the 
Absolutely Beautiful One and the sheer loveliness of His most beautiful names. 

In  Short: These  six  names  and  six  lights  of  the  greatest  name  have  enwrapped 
the  universe  and  all  beings  in  ever-differing,  multifarious colours,  embroideries  and 
adornment. 

S e c o n d  M a t t e r  o f   t h e  F i f t h  R a y 

Just  as  the  manifestation  of  Self-Subsistence  in  the  universe  is  at  the  level  of 
unity  and  glory,  so  in  man,  who  is  the  centre,  pivot,  and  conscious  fruit  of  the 
universe,  it is at the level of oneness and beauty. That is to say, just as the universe 
subsists through the mystery of Self-Subsistence, so it in one respect subsists through 
man, who is the most complete place of manifestation of the name of Self-Subsistent. 
For  since  most  of  the  wisdom,  aims,  purposes,  and  benefits  in  the  universe  look  to 
man,  the  manifestation  of  Self-Subsistence  in  him  is  as  though  a  support  for  the 
universe. It  

 

450

may  be  said  that  the  Ever-Living  and  Self-Subsistent  One  willed  man  to  be  in  the 
universe  and  created  it  for  him.  For  with  the  comprehensiveness of  his  nature,  man 
can understand and take pleasure in all the divine names. He can understand many of 
names  through  the  pleasure  to  be  found  in  sustenance  in  particular.  Whereas  the 
angels cannot know them through that pleasure. 

Because  of  this  important  comprehensiveness,  the  Ever-Living  and  Self-
Subsistent One  has  given man a stomach and appetite with which  He allows  him to 
understand  all  His  names  and  to  taste  all  the  varieties  of  His  bounty,  and  He  has 
generously laden the table with endless varieties of foods for man’s stomach. He has 
also made life a stomach, like the physical one, and has spread an extensive table of 
bounties before the senses, which  are like the  hands of the stomach of life. With its 
senses,  life  offers  a  sort  of  thanks  for  all  the  ways  it  benefits  from  the  table  of 
bounties. 

After  the  stomach  of  life,  He  has  bestowed  on  man  the  stomach  of  humanity, 
which requires sustenance and bounties in a wider sphere than life. Intelligence, mind, 
and imagination, the hands of this stomach, benefit from the table of mercy, which is 
as broad as the heavens and the earth, and give thanks. 

After  the  stomach  of  humanity,  He  has  spread  before  man  another  table  of 
bounties which is infinitely vast. He has made the beliefs of Islam like an immaterial 
stomach requiring extensive sustenance and has extended its table outside the sphere 
of contingency  and included in  it the divine  names. With this stomach and the great 
pleasure of  sustenance,  man  perceives  the  names  of  All-Merciful  and  All-Wise  and 
exclaims: “All praise be to God for His mercifulness and His wisdom!” And so on. 
Man  is  able  to  benefit  from  limitless  divine  bounties  with  this  vast  immaterial 
stomach. And there is a further sphere in this stomach, which is the pleasure of divine 
love. 

Thus, the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One has made man a centre and pivot 
of the whole universe;  He has spread before him  a table of bounties as broad as the 
universe, and subjugated the universe to him. The reasons for this and for the universe 
in one respect subsisting through the mystery of Self-Subsistence manifested through 
man are man’s three important duties: 

His First Duty 
All the varieties of bounties dispersed throughout the universe are put into order 
through  man.  All  those  things  beneficial  to  man  are  strung  like  prayer-beads  on  a 
string and the ends of the strings of those bounties are tied to man’s head. Man is thus 
made a list of all the various contents of the treasuries of mercy. 

 

451

His Second Duty 
By  reason  of  his  comprehensiveness,  this  is  for  man  to  be  the  most  perfect 
addressee of the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent  One; by  appreciating and admiring 
His astonishing arts, to be His loudest herald; and by offering every kind of conscious 
thanks, to give praise, glory, and thanks  for all the varieties of His bounties  and the 
limitless different sorts of His gifts. 

His Third Duty 
Through his life, this is to act in three respects as a mirror to the Ever-Living and 

Self-Subsistent One and His qualities and all-embracing attributes. 

First Aspect: This is to perceive through his own absolute impotence the absolute 
power  of  his  Creator  and  its  levels,  and  through  the  degrees  of  his  impotence,  the 
degrees of His power. It is to understand through his own absolute poverty, His mercy 
and the degrees of His mercy, and through his weakness, His strength; and so on. It is 
to  be  a  mirror  and  measuring  instrument  for  his  Creator’s  attributes  of  perfection 
through his own defective attributes. Just as darkness is a perfect mirror for displaying 
electric  light,  the  brilliance  of  the  light  being  proportionate  to  the  darkness  of  the 
night,  so  man  acts  as  a  mirror  to  the  divine  perfections  through  his  own  defective 
attributes. 

Second Aspect: Using the universe as a  yardstick and with  his own partial will, 
tiny  knowledge,  minute  power,  and  apparent  ownership,  and  by  building  his  own 
house,  man understands  and  acts  as a  mirror  to the  ownership,  art,  will, power,  and 
knowledge of the universe’s Fashioner. 

Third Aspect: Man’s acting as a mirror in this respect has two faces: 
First:  It  is  to  display  in  himself  the  ever-differing  embroideries  of  the  divine 
names. To put it simply, by reason of his comprehensiveness, man is like a tiny index 
and  miniature  specimen  of  the  universe  and  so  displays  the  embroideries  of  all  the 
names. 

Second  Face:  This  face  acts  as  a  mirror  to  the  divine  attributes. That  is  to say, 
just as man points to the life of the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One through his 
own life, so he acts as a mirror to and makes known such attributes of the Ever-Living 
and Self-Subsistent One as hearing and sight, by  means of his own sense of hearing 
and sense of sight that develop during his life-time. 

Furthermore, man acts as a mirror to the sacred attributes of the Ever-Living and 
Self-Subsistent One through the very numerous and responsive senses, meanings, and 
emotions that are present with his life, which do not develop but which boil up in the 
form of feelings and emotions. For example,  

 

452

as a result of such emotions, through meanings like loving and feeling proud, pleased, 
happy and cheerful he acts as a mirror to attributes of that sort, on condition they are 
suitable and worthy for the sacredness and absolute self-sufficiency of the Most Pure 
and Holy Essence. 

Also,  through  his  comprehensive  life,  man  is an  instrument  that  recognizes  and 
measures the attributes and qualities of the All-Glorious One, and is an  index of the 
manifestation of His names, and a conscious mirror, and so on, he acts as a mirror to 
the  Ever-Living  and  Self-Subsistent  One  in  many  respects.  Man  is  also  a  unit  of 
measurement, an index, a scale, and a balance to the truths of the universe.  

For  example,  extremely  decisive  evidence  for  the  existence  of  the  Preserved 
Tablet  in  the  universe  and  an  example  of  it  is  man’s  faculty  of  memory.  And  a 
decisive evidence of the existence of the World of Similitudes and an example of it is 
man’s  faculty  of  imagination.  And  evidence  for the  existence  of  spirit  beings  in  the 
universe and an example of them are the powers and subtle faculties in man.3 And so 
on. In small measure man may display almost visibly the truths of belief present in the 
universe. 

Man  performs  many  important  functions  like  those  mentioned  above.  He  is  a 
mirror  to  enduring  beauty.  He  is  the  place  of  manifestation  announcing  sempiternal 
perfection. He is one needy and thankful for eternal mercy. Since beauty, perfection, 
and mercy are everlasting and eternal, it is surely necessary and inevitable that man, 
who  is  the  desirous  mirror  to  enduring  beauty,  the  enraptured  herald  of  everlasting 
perfection, and thankful and needy for eternal mercy, will go to an everlasting realm 
to  remain  there  permanently,  that  he  will  go  to  eternity  to  accompany those  eternal 
qualities,  and  will  accompany  that  eternal  Beauty,  everlasting  Perfection,  and  ever-
enduring Mercy for all eternity. 

For an eternal beauty cannot be content with an  impermanent admirer, a mortal 
lover. Since beauty  loves  itself,  it desires love  in return for its  love. Transience and 
impermanence transform such love into enmity. If man was not going to go to eternity 
and remain there permanently, he would feel enmity rather than innate love for eternal 
beauty. 

As is described in a footnote in the Tenth Word, one time a celebrated  

                                                 

3 The elements in man point to the elements in the universe, and his bones to its stones and rocks, 

his hair to its plants and trees, and the blood which flows in his body and the fluids which issue from 
his eyes, ears, nose and mouth to the spring and mineral waters of the earth. Similarly, man’s spirit 
points to the spirit world, his faculty of memory to the Preserved Tablet, and his power of imagination 
to the World of Similitudes, and so on. Each of his members and faculties points to a different world 
and bears decisive witness to their existence. 

 

453

beauty expelled a lover from her presence, whereupon his love turned into enmity and 
in  order  to  console  himself,  he  said:  “Ugh!  How  ugly  she  is!”,  thus  insulting  and 
denying her beauty. 

Indeed, man is hostile to what is unfamiliar to him, just as he quite simply wishes 
to  be  hostile  to  and  find  fault  in  things  he  cannot  obtain  or  possess.  Since,  as  the 
whole universe testifies, the True Beloved and Absolutely Beautiful One causes man 
to love Himself through His most beautiful names, which are altogether exquisite, and 
desires man to love Him, then most certainly He would not endow man who is both 
His  beloved  and  His  lover  with  an  innate  enmity  and  cause  him  to  be  vexed  with 
Himself  from  afar;  He  would  not  endow  man’s  spirit  with  a  hidden  enmity,  which 
would be altogether contrary to man’s  nature, who is by his nature the most lovable 
and loving creature and the most exceptional that He has created for worship. For man 
would  only  be  able  to  cure  the  deep  wounds  caused  by  eternal  separation  from  an 
Absolute Beauty that he loves and whose value he appreciates by enmity towards it, 
being vexed with it, and denying it. 

It is from this point that the unbelievers’ enmity towards God Almighty arises. In 
which case, the Pre-Eternal Beauty will surely make manifest in man a perpetual life 
in a permanent realm in order to be present together with  him who is an enraptured 
mirror to Himself on the journey to post-eternity. 

Since man has been created in such a way that by his very nature he longs for and 
loves  an  Ever-Enduring  Beauty;  and  since  an  Ever-Enduring  Beauty  cannot  be 
content  with an impermanent  lover; and since, in order to find consolation  from the 
pain  and  sorrow  arising  from  some  aim  that  he  does  not  know  or  cannot  attain  or 
possess,  man pacifies  himself  through  discovering  the  faults  of  such  an  aim,  rather, 
through nurturing a hidden enmity towards it; and since the universe was created for 
man,  and  man  was  created  to  know  and  love  God;  and  since  the  Creator  of  the 
universe,  together  with  His  names,  is  eternal;  and  since  the  manifestation  of  His 
names will be perpetual, everlasting, and post-eternal; then man will most certainly go 
to an everlasting realm and will manifest an everlasting life. 

Furthermore Muhammad the Arabian (Upon whom be blessings and peace), who 
is the supreme guide and perfect man, made known and demonstrated most perfectly 
in  himself  and  in  his  religion  the  value  and  all  the  perfections  and  duties  we  have 
explained above concerning man. This demonstrates that the universe was created for 
mankind  and  its  aim  and  object  is  mankind.  So  too  the  aim and  object  of  mankind, 
and its choicest and  

 

454

most  valuable  member,  and  its  most  brilliant  mirror  to  the  Single  and  Eternally 
Besought One is Ahmad Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings and peace). 

Upon whom and upon whose family be blessings and peace to the number of 
good  deeds  of  his  community.  O  God!  O  Most  Merciful!  O  Most 
Compassionate! O Single One! O Ever-Living! O Self-Subsistent! O Sapient! 
O All-Just! O Most Holy! We beseech You through the truth of Your All-Wise 
Criterion  of  Truth  and  Falsehood,  the  Qur’an,  and  through  veneration  for 
Your  Most  Noble  Beloved,  and  through  the  truth  of  Your  Most  Beautiful 
Names, and through veneration for Your Greatest Name, to preserve us from 
the evil of the instinctual soul and of Satan and from the evil of jinn and of 
men. Amen. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise!(2:32) 

 

 

455

The Thirty-First Flash 

This has been assigned to The Rays Collection. The Fourteeth Ray consists of the 
defence speeches and letters of Afyon Court and Prison, while the Fifteenth Ray has 
been named Elhüccetü’z-Zehrâ (The Shining Proof), and published.1 

This  consists  of  Lemeât,  the  last  work  of  the  Old  Said,  which  itself  assumed  a 
poetic form and was composed in twenty days during the month of Ramadan. It has 
been included in Sözler (The Words). 

*   *   * 

The Thirty-Second Flash 

*   *   * 

The Thirty-Third Flash 

This consists of the works called in Arabic Katre, Habbe, Şemme, Zerre, Hubab, 
Zühre, and Şûle, and their appendices, the first works of the New Said, inspired in his 
heart  by  reality.  Turkish  translations  of  them  having  been  included  in  Mesnevi-i 
Nûriye, part of the Risale-i Nur Collection, and published. 

 
 

 

                                                 

1 As designated by our Master, Üstad, the Fourteeth Ray was finally called The Defence Speeches 

and Letters of Afyon Court, while the Fifteenth Ray was named El-Hüccetü’z-Zehrâ, and published. 

                                                                          Signed: Bediuzzaman’s Assistants 
 

