5

Volume Two of the Risale-i Nur Collection 

Bediuzzaman Said Nursi 
Letters 1928-1932 

[New edition 2008] 

Contents 

THE FIRST LETTER: The answers to four questions:  

The First answers a question about Khidr’s life, and in connection with it 

explains the five levels of life. 19 

The  Second  explains  how,  in  accordance  with  Qur’anic  verses,  death  is 

created and a bounty, like life.  21 

The  Third  describes  where  Hell  is  situated,  and  the  Greater  and  Lesser 
Hells. It explains  in reasoned manner the wisdom in the creation of the 
Greater Hell, and how in majestic fashion, manifesting divine favour and 
wrath, Heaven and Hell are the two fruits of the tree of the universe and 
will be filled with the produce of this world.  23 

The  Fourth  shows  that  like  passing  love  for  individuals  may  be 
transformed into true love, so through belief in God, passing love for this 
world may be transformed into true love, which is acceptable 25 

THE  SECOND  LETTER:  Six  reasons  why,  in  accordance  with  Qur’anic 
verses,  those  working  for  the  cause  of  religion  should  practice  self-
sufficiency,  and  if  there  is  no  compelling  reason  to  do  so,  not  accept 
alms and gifts.  28 

THE  THIRD  LETTER:  A  description  of  two  verses  which  in  miraculous 
fashion  allude  to  the  face  of  the  heavens  and  orderly  motion  of  the 
heavenly  bodies.  It  includes  two  points,  the  first  explaining  how  the 
wicked will travel to Hell, the second showing the infinite ease in unity 
and infinite difficulty in multiplicity.  31 

THE  FOURTH  LETTER  makes  two  points  about  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  its 
way: firstly, that it manifests the meaning of the verse, “He who has been 
given wisdom...,” and secondly, about the way of impotence. Finally is a 
piece “resembling poetry” on the Utterance of the Stars. 

. 35 

THE  FIFTH  LETTER:  In  the  face  of  the  tendency  to  attach  too  much 
importance to Sufism at the expense of spreading the truths of belief, this 
letter describes the three sorts of saint 

 

6

hood. It states that the unfolding of the truths of belief is the chief aim of 
the Sufi ways, and that this is also possible through the Risale-i Nur, but 
in a shorter time. 

38 

THE  SIXTH  LETTER:  This  explains  the  meaning  of  two  verses  about 
reliance on God, and describes a light and consolation proceeding from 
them and from belief that dispelled the darkness of five grievous degrees 
of exile.  40 

THE  SEVENTH  LETTER:  A  decisive  answer  to  atheists  who  seek  to 
criticize  the  Prophet  Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  number  of  wives  and  his 
marriage  with  Zaynab  in  particular,  which  elucidates  some  important 
instances of wisdom in his marriages.  43 

THE  EIGHTH  LETTER:  In  explanation  of  the  verse,  “God  is  the  Best  of 
Protectors and He is the Most Merciful of the Merciful,” this shows that 
what  the  Prophet  Jacob  (UWP)  felt  for  Joseph  (UWP),  was  not  love  of  a 
passionate kind, but compassion —compassion being more elevated and 
pure,  and  the  means  of  attaining  to  the  divine  names  of  Merciful  and 
Compassionate. 46 

THE  NINTH  LETTER:  A  discussion  about  wonder-working  (kerâmet), 
divine  bestowal,  and  divine  favour  which  points  out  that  although  it  is 
harmful  to  display  wonder-working,  it  is  a  form  of  thanks  to  make 
known divine bestowal, since it is a bounty. Secondly is an explanation 
of  how  intense  emotions  such  as  curiosity,  love,  greed,  ambition,  and 
stubbornness are of two sorts, worldly and real, the purpose of the latter 
being to gain the hereafter. The former sort are the source of bad morals, 
but the latter are beneficial and the  source of good morals. Thirdly is a 
discussion  about  the  differences  between  Islam  and  belief  or  faith 
(iman).  48 

THE TENTH LETTER: This consists of the answers to two questions. The 
first  explains  the  realities  of  the  Clear  Book  and  the  Clear  Record, 
mentioned  in  several  places  in  the  Qur’an.  While  the  second  is  a 
convincing  explanation  of  where  the  Great  Gathering  and  Last 
Judgement will take place. 

52 

THE  ELEVENTH  LETTER:  Four  Topics.  Expounding  the  verse,  “Indeed 
the wiles of Satan are weak,” the first is a cure for those who suffer from 
scruples.  The  second  is  included  in  the  Seventeenth  Word  and  not 
repeated here. The third and fourth are two examples demonstrating the 
impotence of modern civilization before the Qur’an. The examples show 
how the Qur’anic decrees on women’s  inheritance are both pure justice 
and pure compassion.  55 

THE  TWELFTH  LETTER:  The  brief  replies  to  three  questions  disputed 

over by some people with a modern educational background. 

The First explains why Adam was expelled from Paradise and  

 

7

why some of his descendants are sent to Hell.  58 

The  Second  explains  why  the  creation  of  evil  is  not  evil,  and  why divine 

mercy permits it. 

59 

The Third explains why calamities and tribulations being inflicted on even 

the innocent and animals is not tyrannical or contrary to justice. 

61 

THE  THIRTEENTH  LETTER:  The  reply  to  frequent  questions  as  to  how 
Bediuzzaman endured the oppression inflicted on him by the politicians 
and  ‘the  worldly.’  It  shows  how  the  varieties  of  ill-treatment  were 
transformed  into  various  sorts  of  mercy.  It  also  gives  the  reasons 
Bediuzzaman did not apply for his release papers, and in addition, for his 
total indifference towards politics. 

63 

THE FOURTEENTH LETTER was not written. 

THE  FIFTEENTH  LETTER:  Six  important  answers  to  six  important 

questions: 

The  First:  The  answer  in  two  stations  to  the  questions  why  the 
Companions  of  the  Prophet  (UWBP)  did  not  perceive  the  troublemakers 
with the eye of sainthood, so that it resulted in three of the four Rightly-
Guided Caliphs being martyred. 

68 

The  Second:  What  was  the  true  nature  of  the  wars  that  started  in  ‘Ali’s 

time? How should those who took part in them be looked upon? 

70 

The  Third:  An  important  answer  explaining  the  wisdom  in  the  cruel 

treatment received by members of the Prophet’s Family. 

73 

The Fourth: Narrations state that when Jesus  (UWP) kills the Dajjal at the 
end of time, most people will enter the true religion, while others say that 
no  one  will  remain  who  says,  “Allah!  Allah!”  A  convincing  answer  to 
this. 

74 

The  Fifth:  An  explanation  of  the  question:  Will  the  immortal  spirits  be 

grieved by the events of the Last Day? 77 

The  Sixth:  A  satisfying  answer  to  the  question,  Does  the  verse, 
“Everything will perish save His countenance” include the hereafter and 
Paradise and Hell? 

77 

THE SIXTEENTH LETTER consists of five points: 

First  Point  explains  that  service  of  the  Qur’an  precluded  Bediuzzaman’s 

involvement in politics. 80 

Second  Point:  Service  of  the  Qur’an  and  working  seriously  for  the 

hereafter necessitated his aloofness from politics. 

81 

Third Point: Two stories illustrating why Bediuzzaman endured the severe 

oppression he was subject to.  83 

 

8

Fourth Point: The answer to a number of suspicious questions put to him 
by  ‘the  worldly.’  It  describes  some  undeniable  instances  of  divine 
favours connected with his service of the Qur’an. 

85 

Fifth Point: The replies concerning five further matters. 89 

ADDENDUM  TO  THE  SIXTEENTH  LETTER:  Written  to  dispel  the 
groundless fears of the authorities and atheists concerning Bediuzzaman, 
despite  his  having  completely  withdrawn  from  the  world  and  politics; 
also written to preserve the dignity of learning. 

92 

THE  SEVENTEENTH  LETTER:  A  letter  of  condolence  on  the  death  of  a 
child.  Although  it  is  short  and  addressed  to  a  close  student  of 
Bediuzzaman,  it  is  of  considerable  interest.  It  establishes  that,  as  the 
Qur’an  teaches,  children  who  die  before  the  age  of  puberty  remain  as 
children  in  the  Everlasting  Realm,  and  are  returned  to  the  embrace  of 
their parents. 

97 

THE EIGHTEENTH LETTER consists of three important matters. 

The  First  explains  and  illustrates  by  means  of  a  comparison  how 
sometimes  the  things  the  saints  witness  and  have  unfolded  to  them 
through  illumination  in  other  worlds  and  levels  of  existence  appear 
contrary to reality in this Manifest World.  

101 

The  Second:  A  clear  explanation  of  the  way  of  the  Unity  of  Existence, 
which has been the cause of confusion and controversy. It proves that the 
way  of  the  Companions  of  the  Prophet  (UWBP)  and  the  veracious,  the 
103 
people of sobriety, is sounder and more elevated and acceptable. 

An Addendum to the Second Matter 

106 

The  Third:  A  brief  indication  solving  one  of  the  three  main  riddles  of 
creation.  These  have  been  solved  completely  in  the  Twenty-Ninth  and 
110 
Thirtieth Words, and this third one, in the Twenty-Fourth Letter. 

THE  NINETEENTH  LETTER,  The  Miracles  of  Muhammad  (UWBP): 
Itself a marvel  in several respects, this Letter describes more than three 
hundred  miracles  of  Muhammad  (UWBP).  It  consists  of  nineteen  signs.
  112 

The First Sign establishes that the Master and Owner of the Universe will 
speak  with  man,  and  foremost  the  most  perfect  of  mankind,  with 
Muhammad  (UWBP),  and  make  him  the  guide  to  the  rest  of  humanity.
  114 

 

9

Second Sign: On the prophethood of Muhammad (UWBP) 

115 

Third Sign: The evidences for Muhammad’s (UWBP) messengership 

116 

Fourth  Sign:  Six  principles  ensuring  a  complete  understanding  of  the 
Noble  Prophet’s  predictions about  his  Companions,  his  family,  and  his 
community. 

118 

Fifth  Sign:  Examples  of  Hadiths  concerning  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP) 
predictions  relating  to  the  Unseen.  It includes  important  answers  to  the 
questions  of  why  ‘Ali  did  not  precede  the  others  in  holding  the 
Caliphate,  and  why  Islam  experienced  such  disorders  during  his 
Caliphate;  why  the  Caliphate  did  not  remain  in  his  family;  and  the 
reasons for the dissensions at that time. 

125 

Sixth Sign: Further predictions of future events, and includes the answer to 

a question about the Shi‘a’s love for ‘Ali. 

132 

Seventh Sign: Sixteen examples relating to the Prophet’s (UWBP) effecting 

increase in food.140 

water.  149 

Eighth  Sign:  Relates  miracles  which  were  manifested  in  connection  with 

Ninth Sign: Examples of miracles related to trees. Like human beings, trees 
155 

obeyed his orders, and moving from their places, came to him. 

Tenth Sign: The miracle of the Moaning of the Pole. 

159 

Eleventh  Sign:  Shows  how  rocks  and  mountains  from  among  lifeless 

creatures demonstrated prophetic miracles. ........162 

Twelfth Sign: Consists of three examples related to the Eleventh Sign, but 

which are of great importance.  166 

Thirteenth  Sign:  Examples  of  the Prophet’s  (UWBP)  healing  the  sick  and 

the wounded. 

169 

  175 

Fourteenth  Sign describes  wonders  manifested as  a  result  of  his  prayers.

Fifteenth Sign: Consists of three branches: 

The First shows how the animal kingdom recognized the Prophet (UWBP) 

and displayed his miracles. 

185 

The  Second  concerns  corpses,  jinns,  and  angels  recognizing  God’s 

Messenger (UWBP). 

189 

The Third is the protection and preservation of the Noble Prophet (UWBP), 
of which there were many instances, and which were clear miracles.  193 

Sixteenth Sign: Describes the wonders that took place before his  

 

10

prophetic mission, but which were related to it, called irhasat. They were 
of three kinds: 

The  First  Kind:  The  tidings  of  Muhammad’s  Prophethood  given  by  the 

Torah, the Bible, the Psalms of David, and other scriptures.  197 

The  Second  Kind:  Tidings  of  his  coming  given  by  soothsayers,  and 

people known as saints and gnostics.  209 

The Third Kind: The wondrous events that occurred at the time of, and in 
214 

conjunction with, the birth of God’s Noble Messenger (UWBP). 

Seventeenth Sign: The Messenger’s (UWBP) own self  217 

Eighteenth  Sign: The  greatest  miracle  of  the  Messenger  (UWBP), the  All-
Wise  Qur’an.  It  consists  of  three  points  describing  aspects  of  the 
Qur’an’s miraculousness 

219 

Nineteenth Sign: Fifteen Principles indicating the integrity, and veracity of 
the  Prophet  (UWBP),  the  most  conclusive  proof  of  divine  unity  and 
eternal happiness. 

228 

FIRST  ADDENDUM  TO  THE  MIRACLES  OF  MUHAMMAD 
(UWBP):  The  Nineteenth  Word,  it  proves  decisively  and  explains  the 
Messengership of Muhammad (UWBP).  

236 

SECOND ADDENDUM: About the Miracle of the Splitting of the Moon. 
Refuting  objections  made  to  the  miracle  in  the  name  of  science,  it 
demonstrates that there was nothing to prevent its occurrence, and proves 
clearly that it happened. 245 

THIRD ADDENDUM: About the Messengership of Mu-hammad (UWBP), 
this is a concise answer to the question in the Treatise on the Ascension: 
“Why  was this mighty  Ascension particular to Muhammad the Arabian 
(UWBP)?” 

250 

FOURTH ADDENDUM: The Sixteenth Degree, on the Messengership of 

Muhammad, from The Supreme Sign.  254 

THE TWENTIETH LETTER contains two stations and an introduction, and 
expounds the verse, “So know there is no god but God,” and the eleven 
phrases of the Hadith: “There is no god but God, He is One, He has no 
partner etc.” The first station points out the good news contained in each 
phrase, and the second demonstrates with powerful proofs the degrees of 
the true affirmation of divine unity. 

261 

ADDENDUM  TO  THE  TENTH  PHRASE  OF  THE  TWENTIETH 
LETTER:  That  is:  “And  He  is  Powerful  over  all things.”  It  points  out 
through  three  comparisons  that  when  all  things  are  attributed  to  divine 
power, they become as simple  

 

11

as  one  thing,  and  if  they  are  not  and  are  ascribed  to  things  other  than 
Him, each thing becomes as difficult as all things. 

298 

THE TWENTY-FIRST LETTER: A short but important letter showing how 
on five levels the verse, “Whether one or both of them attain old age in 
your life...” summons children to be kindly to their parents.  303 

THE  TWENTY-SECOND  LETTER:  In  accordance  with  a  number  of 
Qur’anic  verses,  the  First  Topic  summons  believers  to  love  and 
brotherhood. It points out effective ways of preventing discord, rancour, 
and enmity, and proves that they are extremely damaging both from the 
point  of  view  of  truth,  wisdom,  humanity,  and  Islam,  and  for personal, 
social, and spiritual life, and are to be rejected. 

306 

The  Second  Topic  points  out  effective  ways  of  avoiding  greed,  another 
awesome  disease,  as  harmful  for  the  life  of  Islam  as  enmity.  It  also 
explains the importance of zakat and the wisdom in this pillar of Islam..
  316 

Conclusion showing how the Qur’an reproaches the backbiter on six levels 
with the  verse, “Would any among you like to eat the flesh of his dead 
brother?” 

321 

THE TWENTY-THIRD LETTER: The answers to seven questions:. 

The First: What is the best way believers can pray for one another? 

323 

324 

The Second: May the phrase “May God be pleased with him” be used for 

anyone other than the Companions? 

325 

The Third: Which were superior, the great interpreters of the Holy Law, or 

the ‘shahs’ of the true Sufi paths? 

325 

The  Fourth:  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  verse,  “God  is  with  those  who 

patiently persevere?”  326 

The  Fifth:  How  did  the  Prophet  (UWBP)  worship  before  his  prophetic 

mission? 327 

The Sixth: What was the wisdom in his prophethood commencing when he 

was forty years of age?  327 

The Seventh: Is the following a Hadith: “The best of your youths are those 

who resemble men of mature age.”? 

328 

The  letter  concludes  with  a  subtle  point  about  Joseph’s  (UWP)  elevated 
veracity, inspired by the verse, “Take my soul at death as one submitting 
to Your will.”..  329 

THE  TWENTY-FOURTH  LETTER  consists  of  two  stations  which  solve 

one of the obscure riddles of the universe, and form an  

 

12

to 

the  question:  How  can 

the  divine  names  of  All-
answer 
Compassionate, Wise, and Loving be reconciled with death, separation, 
calamity,  and    suffering?  The  first  station  consists  of  five  signs  which 
show  the  necessitating  cause  and  reason,  the  second  station,  five 
indications, which point out the aims and benefits. 

330 

FIRST ADDENDUM TO THE TWENTY-FOURTH LETTER: In five 
points,  this  expounds  significant  aspects  of  the  verse,  “No  importance 
would  your  Sustainer  attach  to  you,  were  it  not  for  your  supplication”
  347 

SECOND  ADDENDUM:  A  convincing,  reasoned  answer,  in  five  points,  
to  three  important  questions  about  the  Ascension  of  the  Prophet 
Muhammad  (UWBP)  and  the  Mevlid.  The  conclusion  shows  God’s 
Messenger  (UWBP)  to  be  the  most  perfect  person in  the  cosmos  and  its 
universal master. 

352 

THE TWENTY-FIFTH LETTER was to consist of twenty-five points about 

Sura Ya. Sin., but was not realized. 

THE TWENTY-SIXTH LETTER: Consists of four topics. 

First  Topic:  ‘A  Proof  of  the  Qur’an  Against  Satan  and  His  Party.’  This 
defeats  in argument the Devil and his  followers  by refuting clearly one 
of  their  cunning  stratagems,  which  is  to  be  ‘unbiased;’  that  is,  their 
deceiving  people  into  considering  the  Qur’an  and  matters  of  religion 
impartially.. 

359 

Second Topic explains  how a person may  have  numerous personalities  in 
respect  of  his  different  duties,  and  describes  the  author’s  three 
personalities. 

370 

Third  Topic:  In  seven  matters,  this  expounds  the  verse,  “We...  made  you 
into  nations  and  tribes,  that  you  may  know  each  other,”  pointing  out 
significant  truths  about  social  relations  and  mankind  being  created  as 
different  peoples  and  groups.  A  beneficial  remedy  for  nationalism,  an 
awesome disease of the times, and also exposes the pseudo-patriots and 
their fraudulent attitudes.......... 372 

Fourth Topic: Consists of ten unrelated matters, which form the answers to 

six questions. 

First Matter explains several points inspired by the Qur’an related to “the 
worlds” in the phrase “Sustainer of All the Worlds,” and their numbering 
eighteen thousand. 

 379 

Second  Matter  explains  what  Muhyi’l-Din  al-‘Arabi  meant  by  saying  to 
Fakhr  al-Din  Razi:  “To  know  God  is  different  to  knowing  He  exists.”
  381 

 

13

Third Matter:  How the verse, “We have honoured the sons of Adam,” is 
382 

conformable with the verse, “He was indeed unjust and foolish?” 

Fourth Matter: A brilliant reply to a question about the wisdom contained 
in  the  Hadith:  “Renew  your  belief  by  means  of  ‘There  is  no  god  but 
God.’”  383 

Fifth Matter: Are both parts of the confession of faith necessary? 

386 

Sixth  Matter:  With  a  comparison,  this  drives  Satan  and  his  party  into  a 
corner and takes possession of the field in the name of the Qur’an, thus 
showing all the Prophet’s (UWBP) qualities and conduct to be miraculous 
and proving his prophethood.  387 

Seventh Matter: Seven brief examples of people who for various reasons 
ceased  their  service  to  the Qur’an  and received  blows  contrary  to  their 
intentions, written to strengthen their morale and dispel their groundless 
fears. 

 389 

Eighth Matter: A lucid explanation of why the Qur’an and glorifications 

of the Prophet (UWBP) cannot be translated 

 391 

Ninth  Matter:    A  reply  to  the  question,  “Can  there  be  saints  outside the 

Sunnis, since they are the people of truth?” 

394 

Tenth  Matter:  Principles  for  Bediuzzaman’s  visitors,  who  are  of  three 

sorts, and their connection with his three personalities.  

394 

THE  TWENTY-SEVENTH  LETTER  has been  published  separately  under 
the titles of Barla Lahikası, Kastamonu Lahikası, and Emirdağ Lahikası. 

THE TWENTY-EIGHTH LETTER consists of eight matters. 

First  Matter:  Seven  points  explaining  the  reality  and  benefits  of  true 

dreams.  399 

Second Matter: A reply  intending to solve an  argument about the  Hadith 
which describes how Moses (UWP) struck Azra’il (UWP) in the eye, and is 
404 
a satisfying answer to objections of this sort levelled at Hadiths.. 

Third  Matter:  Five  points  explaining  that  those  who  visit  Bediuzzaman 
should do so only in respect of his being herald of the Qur’an, not with 
any other intention. It mentions too some examples of the divine favours 
associated with service of the Qur’an that Bediuzzaman and his students 
had received. 

408 

Fourth Matter: Four points written in the tongue of the Old Said, in reply 

to questions about the small mosque he used  

 

14

being  unlawfully  raided  on  a  number  of  occasions,  and  subsequently 
closed  415 

Fifth  Matter:  On  Thanks;  this  expounds  most  convincingly  the  many 
Qur’anic commands to offer thanks. It demonstrates that the universe is a 
treasury with thanks being the key; and that sustenance is its result and 
prompts thanks. 419 

Sixth  Matter:  This  was  not  included  here  as  it  was  to  be  included  in 

another collection. 

Seventh  Matter  consists  of  seven  signs  describing  seven  instances  of 
divine  favour  connected  with  the  Risale-i  Nur  and  those  who  serve  it. 
These  are  preceded  by  seven  reasons  for  making  known  the  above 
favours.  424 

Answer to a Confidential Question explains the power and effectiveness 

of the Risale-i Nur. 

434 

Conclusion to the Seventh Matter describes a further divine favour in the 

form of the coincidences (tevâfukat)  436 

Eighth  Matter  consists  of  eight  points,  which  form  the  answers  to  six 

questions: 

Risale-i Nur. 

439 

First  Point  concerns  ‘coincidences’  being  found  in  all  the  parts  of  the 

Second and Third Points were not included. 

Fourth  Point  consists  of  answers  to  six  questions  about  the  Last 

Judgement and Great Gathering 

441 

Fifth Point: In the period between prophets, did the Messenger’s (UWBP) 

forefathers belong to a religion and were they religious? 

443 

Sixth  Point:  Were  there  any  prophets  among  the  Messenger’s  (UWBP) 

forefathers? 

444 

Seventh  Point:  Which  of  the  narrations  about  the  belief  of  the 
Messenger’s (UWBP) parents and his grandfather are the most authentic?
  444 

Eighth Point: Which is the authentic narration concerning his uncle, Abu 

Talib?  445 

THE  TWENTY-NINTH  LETTER  consists  of  nine  sections,  and  contains 

twenty-nine important points. 

First Section is nine points. 

First Point: An answer to those who say, “The Qur’an’s mysteries are not 

known; the commentators have not understood its realities.”  447 

Second Point: Explains the wisdom in such Qur’anic oaths as,  

 

15

“By the sun and its glorious splendour.” 

448 

Third  Point  is  about  the  Disjointed  Letters,  found  at  the  beginning  of 

some Suras. 

449 

Fourth Point points out a flash of the Qur’an’s miraculousness in its style, 

showing that its true translation is not possible. 

449 

Fifth Point demonstrates that it is impossible to translate the phrase, “All 
praise  be  to  God,”  since  its  meaning  can  be  expressed  only  in  a  few 
lines. 

451 

Sixth  Point:  An  illuminating  explanation  of  the  use  of  the  first  person 
plural  in  “You  alone  do  we  worship  and  from  You  alone  do  we  seek 
help.”  452 

Seventh Point: Expounding “Guide us to the Straight Path,” it points out 

the harm caused by innovations. 

455 

Eighth  Point  explains  a  point  about  the  marks  of  Islam  being  general 

rights.  455 

are of two kinds 456 

Ninth Point explains the reason matters of the Shari‘a related to worship 

Second Section: On the Month of Ramadan. Nine points explaining nine 
instances  of  wisdom  in  the fast  of Ramadan,  expounding  the  verse,  “It 
457 
was the month of Ramadan in which the Qur’an was revealed” 

Third Section concerns the writing of a Qur’an showing the ‘coinciding’ of 
the word Allah. Consists of nine matters, only the first was included here
  465 

Fourth Section is also about ‘coincidences,’ it consists of three points, the 

four points of the third being included here 

466 

Fifth Section: One beautiful light of the many mysteries of the verse, “God 
is  the  Light  of  the  heavens  and  earth.”  This  treatise  is  short,  yet 
important. 

470 

Sixth Section: Written to warn students and servants of the Qur’an against 
being  deceived  by  six  of  the  stratagems  of  satanic  individuals  and 
dissemblers. 

First Stratagem exposes their attempts to attract people through desire for 

rank and position. 

474 

Second Stratagem points out how they take advantage of the vein of fear.

  477 

Third Stratagem: They hunt many people through greed and ambition, in 

order to make them give up service to the Qur’an. 

480 

Fourth  Stratagem:  They  excite  nationalist  feelings  in  or-der  to  create 
482 

discord and make Bediuzzaman’s students lose their love of him. 

 

16

Fifth Stratagem: They encourage egotism 

488 

Sixth  Stratagem:  They  take  advantage  of  the  human  characteristics  of 
laziness, the desire for physical comfort, and attachment to other duties.
  490 

A Sacred Date: The date a Qur’anic mystery became clear 

911 

Addendum to the Sixth Section: Sixth Questions exposing the arbitrary, 

unjust treatment Bediuzzaman received 

492 

Seventh  Section:  Seven  signs  consisting  of  seven  powerful  answers  to 

seven questions. 

First Sign: A firm answer to those people of innovation who claim that it 
is permissible to translate the call to prayer into other languages because 
certain people who have embraced Islam do so in Europe. 

496 

Second Sign: Decisive answers to false comparisons between Christianity 

and Islam 

498 

and its results.  501 

Third Sign:  An  illuminating  answer  to  misplaced  accusations  of  bigotry 

Fourth Sign: An answer revealing the false claims of nationalists. 

502 

Fifth Sign: A powerful answer explaining the reality of the Mahdi. 

503 

Sixth  Sign:  A  brief  answer  mentioning  the  Mahdi’s  community  and  a 

Christian community routing the secret society of the Dajjal  505 

Seventh  Sign:  An  explanation  of  why  as  the  New  Said,  Bediuzzaman 

gave up the scholarly method of the Old Said  505 

Eighth  Section:  The  Eight  Symbols.  These  eight  short  treatises  on 

‘coincidences’ (tevâfukat) are not included here. 

Ninth Section: The Nine Allusions, which elucidate the ways of sainthood 

and Sufism: 

First Allusion: A definition of the Sufi path, and explanation of the truth 
underlying  the  terms  Sufism,  path,  sainthood,  and  spiritual  journeying
  507 

Second  Allusion  explains  how  the  heart  is  worked  through  reflective 
thought and remembrance of God, and how this is a means to happiness.
  508 

Third Allusion explains how sainthood is a proof of prophethood, and the 

Sufi way, a proof of the Shari‘a.508 

Fourth  Allusion:  This  explains  the  two  ways  on  the  Sufi  path,  of  inner 

journeying and outer journeying. 

510 

 

17

Fifth Allusion explains the reality of the Unity of Existence and the Unity 
of  Witnessing,  and  establishes  the  superiority  of  the  followers  of  the 
legacy of prophethood.  513 

Sixth  Allusion:  Three  points  showing  that  the  best  of  the  ways  of 
sainthood is following the practices of the Prophet (UWBP), and its most 
important  foundation,  sincerity;  and  that  this  world  is  the  realm  of 
wisdom and service, not reward. 

515 

Seventh Allusion: Four points explaining that the Sufi way  should serve 
the  Shari‘a;  that  its  highest  degrees  are  matters  of  the  Shari‘a;  that  it 
should always remain as a means and follow the Shari‘a; and whether or 
not those outside the bounds of the Sunna and Shari‘a are acceptable 516 

Eighth Allusion describes eight abysses on the Sufi way 

Ninth Allusion: Nine of the sweet fruits of the Sufi way 

520 

527 

ADDENDUM:  A  short,  safe,  and  direct  way  leading  to  Almighty  God, 

taken from the Qur’an  524 

THE  THIRTIETH  LETTER:  The  Arabic  Qur’anic  commentary,  Signs  of 
Miraculousness: The Inimitability of the Qur’an’s Conciseness (Isharat 
al-I‘jaz fi Mazann al-Ijaz). 

THE THIRTY-FIRST LETTER: The thirty-one Flashes. 

THE THIRTY-SECOND LETTER: The treatise in free verse called Lemeât. 
It  is  also  the  Thirty-Second  Flash  and  has  been  included  at  the  end  of 
Sözler. 

THE  THIRTY-THIRD  LETTER:  Thirty-Three  Windows  making  known 
the Creator. It is in one respect the Thirty-Third Word and has therefore 
been included in The Words (Sözler). 

SEEDS  OF  REALITY:  Aphorisms  compiled  from  some  of  Bediuzzaman’s 

early works and first published in 1920. 

528 

 

19

IN THE NAME OF GOD, 
THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE 

And from Him do we seek help 

The First Letter 

In His Name, be He glorified! 

And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.1 

[This consists of the brief answers to four questions.] 

FIRST QUESTION 

it? 

Is Khidr alive? If he is alive, why do some leading religious scholars not accept 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  He  is  alive,  but  there  are  five  levels  of  life.  He  is  at  the 

second. It is because of this that some religious scholars have been doubtful about it. 

The First Level of Life is that of our life, which is very restricted. 
The  Second  Level  of  Life  is  that  of  Khidr  and  Ilyas  (May  God  grant  them 

peace), which is free to an extent. That is to say, they can be present 

                                                 
1 Bediuzzaman explained as follows his reasons for heading his letters with this verse (17:44): “This 
was the first door opened to me from the sacred treasuries of the All-Wise Qur’an. Of the divine truths 
of the Qur’an, it was the truth of this verse that first became clear to me and it is this truth that pervades 
most parts of the Risale-i Nur. Another reason is that the masters in whom I have confidence used it at 
the head of their letters.” (See, Barla Lahikası, 335.) (Tr.) 

 

20

 in  numerous  places  at  the  same  time.  They  are  not  permanently  restricted  by  the 
requirements of humanity like we are. They can eat and drink like us when they want 
to,  but  are  not  compelled  to  like  we  are.  Saints  who  attain  to  direct  vision  and 
knowledge of reality have reported virtually unanimously their adventures with Khidr 
and these elucidate and prove this level of life. One of the degrees of sainthood, even, 
is called the degree of Khidr. A saint who reaches it receives instruction from Khidr 
and  meets  with  him.  But  it  sometimes  happens  that  such  a  person  is  mistakenly 
thought to be Khidr himself. 

The Third Level of Life is that of Idris and Jesus (May God grant them peace), 
which  is removed from the requirements of humanity, and is an angelic  level of life 
and  acquires  a  luminous  fineness.  Quite  simply,  Idris  and  Jesus  are  present  in  the 
heavens with their earthly bodies, which have the subtlety of bodies from the World 
of Similitudes and the luminosity of astral bodies. There is a Hadith that states that at 
the  end of time, Jesus (Upon whom be peace) will come and will act in accordance 
with  the  Shari‘a  of  Muhammad  (UWBP).2  This  indicates  that  at  the  end  times  the 
religion of Christianity will be purified and divest itself of superstition in the face of 
the  current  of  unbelief  and  atheism  born  of  naturalist  philosophy,  and  will  be 
transformed  into  Islam.  At  that  point,  on  the  one  hand  the  collective  personality  of 
Christianity will  kill the  fearsome collective personality of  irreligion with the sword 
of  heavenly  revelation;  and  on  the  other,  representing  the  collective  personality  of 
Christianity,  Jesus  (Upon  whom  be  peace)  will  kill  the  Dajjal,  who  represents  the 
collective personality of irreligion; that is, he will kill atheistic thought. 

The  Fourth  Level  of  Life  is  that  of  the  martyrs.  According  to  the  Qur’an,  the 
martyrs are at a level of life higher than that of the other dead in their graves. Since 
they  sacrificed  their  worldly  lives  in  the  way  of  truth,  in  His  perfect  munificence 
Almighty God bestows on them  in the Intermediate Realm  a  life resembling earthly 
life, but without its sorrows and hardships. They do not know themselves to be dead 
and  suppose  only  that  they  have  gone  to  a  better  world.  Enjoying  themselves  in 
perfect  happiness,  they  do  not  suffer  the  pains  of  separation  that  accompany  death.3 
For  sure  the  spirits  of  the  dead  are  immortal,  but  they  know  they  are  dead.  The 
happiness and pleasure they experience in the Intermediate World are not equal to the 
martyrs’  happiness.  Like  if  two  men  in  their  dreams  enter  a  beautiful  palace 
resembling Paradise: one knows that he is dreaming and the  

                                                 
2 Bukhari, Mazalim, 31: Buyu’, 102; Muslim, Iman, 242, 343; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 33. 
3 See, Tirmidhi, Jihad, 6; Nasa’i, Jihad, 35; Ibn Maja, Jihad, 16: Darimi, Jihad, 7. 

 

21

pleasure  and  enjoyment  he  receives  are  deficient.  He  thinks:  “If  I  wake  up,  all  this 
enjoyment will disappear.” While the other man is unaware that he is dreaming, and 
he experiences true pleasure and delight. 

Thus,  the  martyrs  partake  of  life  in  the  Intermediate  Realm  differently  to  the 
other dead. It has been definitely established by innumerable incidents and narrations 
that they manifest life in the way described above and suppose themselves to be alive. 
Indeed, their level of life has been illuminated and proved on numerous occasions by 
such occurrences as Hamza (May God be pleased with him) – the lord of the martyrs 
–  protecting  those  who  have  recourse  to  him,  and  his  performing  and  making 
performed tasks in this world. I myself, even, had a nephew and student called Ubeyd. 
He  was  killed  at  my  side  and  in my  place  and  became  a  martyr.  Then,  when  I  was 
being held as a prisoner-of-war at a place three months’ distance away, I entered his 
grave in a true dream, which was a sort of dwelling-place under the earth, although I 
did  not  know  where  he  was  buried.  I  saw  him  living  the  martyrs’  level  of  life.  He 
evidently  thought  that  I was  dead  and said  that  he  had  grieved  over  me greatly.  He 
thought  he  was  alive,  but  having  retreated  before  the  Russian  invasion,  had  made 
himself  a  good  home  under  the  ground.  Thus,  owing  to  such  indications,  my 
unimportant  dream  convinced  me  about  the  above-mentioned  truth  as  certainly  as 
having witnessed it. 

The  Fifth  Level  of  Life  is  that  of  the  spirits  of  the  dead  in  their  graves.  Yes, 
death is a change of residence, the liberation of the spirit, a discharge from duties; it is 
not  annihilation,  non-existence,  and  a  going  to  nothingness.  Many  evidences 
illuminate and prove this level of life, such as the innumerable occasions the spirits of 
saints  have  assumed  forms  and  appeared  to  those  who  unveil  the  realities,  and  the 
other dead have communicated with us while awake or sleeping and have told us of 
things  that  are  conformable  with  reality.  In  fact,  the  Twenty-Ninth  Word,  which  is 
about  the  immortality  of  man’s  spirit,  demonstrates  this  level  of  life  with 
incontrovertible proofs. 

SECOND QUESTION 

Who creates death and life that He may try you, which of you is the best in 
conduct.(67:2) 

Verses  like  this  in  the  All-Wise  Qur’an,  the  Criterion  of  Truth  and  Falsehood, 
make it understood that death is created like life; it too is a bounty. But on the face of 
it, death is dissolution, non-existence, decay, the extinction of life, the annihilator of 
pleasures; so how can it be created and a bounty? 

 

22

 
T h e  A n s w e r :  As was stated at the end of the answer to the first question, 
death  is  a  discharge  from  the  duties  of  life;  it  is  a  rest,  a  change  of  residence,  a 
transformation  of  existence;  it  is  an  invitation  to  eternal  life,  a  beginning,  the 
introduction  to  an  immortal life.  Just  as  life  comes  into  the  world through  an  act  of 
creation and is appointed and determined, so departure from the world is created and 
determined,  and  is  planned  wisely  and  purposively.  The  ways  plants  die,  plant  life 
being the simplest level of life, show their death to be a more orderly work of art than 
life. For although the death of fruits, seeds, and grains appears to occur through their 
decay and dissolution, it is in fact a sort of kneading that comprises exceedingly well-
ordered chemical reactions and a balanced combining of elements and wise formation 
of particles; their unseen, orderly and wise deaths appear through the life of the new 
shoots.  That is  to  say,  the  death  of  the  seed  is  the  onset  of  the  shoot’s  life.  Indeed, 
since its death is like life itself, it is created and regular the same as life is. 

Moreover,  the  death  of  living  fruits  or  animals  in  the  human  stomach  is  the 
beginning of their rising to the level of human life; it may therefore be said that being 
thus, their death is more orderly and created than is their life. 

If the death of plant life, the lowest level of life, is created, wise, and ordered in 
that way, the death that befalls human life, the highest level of life, must be the same. 
Similarly, as  a seed sown  in the  ground becomes a tree in the  world of the air, so a 
man who is laid in the earth will surely produce the shoots of an everlasting life in the 
Intermediate Realm. 

Now for the aspects of death that are bounties; we shall point out four of them. 
The First: Death is a great bounty because it means one is freed from the duties 
and  obligations  of  life,  which  become  burdensome.  It  is  also  a  door  through  which 
one  passes  in  order  to  join  and  be  united  with  one’s  friends,  ninety-nine  out  of  a 
hundred of whom are already in the Intermediate Realm. 

The  Second:  It  is  to  be  released  from  the  narrow,  irksome,  turbulent  prison  of 
this world, and to receive an expansive, joyful, troublefree immortal life, and to enter 
the sphere of the Eternally Beloved One’s mercy. 

The Third: There are numerous factors like old age which make life arduous and 
show  death  to  be  a  far  superior  bounty.  For  example,  if  together  with  your  very 
elderly  parents  who  cause  you  much  distress  you  beheld  before  you  your 
grandfather’s  grandfathers  in  all  their  pitiful  state,  you  would  understand  what  a 
calamity life is, and what a bounty, death. 

 

23

 Another  example:  one  can  imagine  how  difficult  life  is  in  the  harsh  conditions  of 
winter for the beautiful flying insects, the lovers of the beautiful flowers, and what a 
mercy death is for them.  

The  Fourth:  Just  as  sleep  is  a  comfort,  a  mercy,  a  rest,  particularly  for  those 
afflicted by disaster and the wounded and the sick, so too is death, the elder brother of 
sleep,  a  pure  bounty  and  mercy  for  the  disaster-struck  and  those  who  suffer 
tribulations that drive them to suicide. However, as  is proved decisively  in many of 
the Words, for the people of misguidance, death is pure torment the same as life, and 
pure affliction, but that is outside the discussion here. 

THIRD QUESTION 

Where is Hell? 
T h e  A n s w e r :  

Say: the knowledge is with God alone.(67:26) * None knows the Unseen save 
God.(27:65) 

According to some narrations, Hell is beneath the earth.4 As we have explained in 
other  places,  in  its  annual  orbit  the  globe  traces  a  circle  around  an  area  that  in  the 
future will accommodate the Great Gathering and Last Judgement. It means that Hell 
is beneath the area of its orbit. It is invisible and imperceptible because it consists of 
veiled,  lightless  fire.  Within  the  vast  stretch  of  space  travelled  by  the  earth  many 
creatures are found that are invisible because they are without light. Just as the moon 
loses its existence when its light recedes, so we are unable to see numerous lightless 
globes and creatures, although they are before our eyes. 

There are two Hells, the Lesser and the Greater. In the future, the Lesser will be 
transformed into the Greater and is like its seed; in the future it will become one of its 
habitations. The  Lesser  Hell  is under the earth, that is, at the earth’s centre. It is the 
inside  and  centre  of  the  globe.  Geology  informs  us  that  in  digging  downwards,  the 
heat for the most part increases one degree every thirty-three metres. That means that 
since half the diameter of the earth is around six  thousand kilometres, the fire at the 
centre  is  at  a  temperature  of  around  two  hundred  thousand  degrees,  that  is,  two 
hundred times hotter than fire at the circumference; this is in agreement with what is 
stated in Hadiths.5 The Lesser Hell performs many of the Greater Hell’s functions in 
this world and Intermediate Realm, and this is indicated in 

                                                 
4 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 281; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 568. 
5 See, Bukhari, Bad’ al-Khalq, 10; Muslim, Janna, 30; Tirmidhi, Jahannam, 7; Musnad, ii, 313. 

 

24

Hadiths. Just as in the world of the  hereafter, the earth will pour its inhabitants into 
the arena of the resurrection within its annual orbit; so at the divine command it will 
hand over the Lesser Hell within it to the Greater Hell.  

Some of the Mu‘tazilite authorities said that Hell will be created later, but such an 
idea is mistaken and foolish, and arises from Hell not having completely opened up at 
the present time and developed into a form entirely appropriate for its inhabitants. In 
order  to  see  with  our  worldly  eyes  the  dwelling  places  of  the  next  world  within  the 
veil  of  the  Unseen and  to  demonstrate  their  existence,  either  the  universe  has  to  be 
shrunk  to  the  size  of  two  provinces,  or  our  eyes  have  to  be  enlarged  to  the  size  of 
stars, so that we can see and specify their places. God knows best, the dwelling-places 
of  the  hereafter  are  not  visible  to  our  worldly  eyes,  but  as  indicated  by  certain 
narrations, the Hell of the hereafter is connected with our world. A Hadith says about 
the intense heat of summer: “It gives an inkling of Hell.”6 That is to say, the Greater 
Hell is not visible to the tiny, dim eyes of this world’s minds. However, we may look 
with the light of the divine name of All-Wise, as follows: 

The Greater Hell beneath the earth’s annual orbit has as though made the Lesser 
Hell  at  the earth’s  centre  its  deputy  and  made  it perform  some of  its functions. The 
possessions  of  the  All-Powerful  One  of  Glory  are  truly  extensive;  He  situated  the 
Greater Hell wherever divine wisdom required. Yes, the All-Powerful One of Glory, 
the All-Wise One of Perfection, who issues the command of “‘Be!’ and it is,”(36:82) 
has tied  the  moon  to the  earth  before our  very  eyes  with  perfect  wisdom  and order, 
and with vast power and perfect order tied the earth to the sun, and has made the sun 
travel  together  with  its planets  at  a  speed  close  to that  of  the  annual  rotation  of the 
earth, and with His majestic dominicality, according to one possibility, made it travel 
towards the sun of suns, and like a fleet decked out with electric lights has made the 
stars luminous witnesses to His sovereign dominicality. It is not far from the perfect 
wisdom,  tremendous power,  and sovereign  dominicality  of  one  thus  All-Glorious  to 
make the Greater Hell like the boiler of an electric-light factory and with it set fire to 
the stars of the heavens that look to the hereafter, and give them heat and power. That 
is, give light to the stars from  

                                                 
6 Bukhari, Mawaqit, 9, 10; Adhan 18; Bad’l-Khalq, 10; Muslim, Masajid, 180, 181, 183, 184, 186; Abu 
Da’ud, Salat, 4; Tirmidhi, Mawaqit, 5; Nasa’i, Mawaqit, 5; Ibn Maja, Salat, 4; Tibb, 19; Darimi, Salat, 
14; Muwatta’, Waqut, 27, 28, 29; Musnad, ii, 229, 238, 256, 266, 285, 318, 324, 393, 394, 462, 501, 
507; iii, 9, 53, 59; iv, 250, 662; v, 155, 162, 176, 368. 

 

25

Paradise, the world of light, and send them fire and heat from Hell, and at the same 
time, make part of that Hell a habitation and place of imprisonment for those who are 
to be tormented. Furthermore, He is an All-Wise Creator who conceals a tree as large 
as  a  mountain  in  a  seed  the  size  of  a  finger-nail.  It  is  surely  not  far  then  from  the 
power  and  wisdom  of  such  an  All-Glorious  One  to  conceal  the  Greater  Hell  in  the 
seed of the Lesser Hell in the heart of the globe of the earth. 

I  n    S  h  o  r  t  :  Paradise  and  Hell  are  the  two  fruits  of  a  branch  of  the  tree  of 
creation, which stretches out towards eternity. The fruits’ place is at the branch’s tip. 
And they are the two results of the chain of the universe; and the places of the results 
are the two sides of the chain. The base and heavy are on its lower side, the luminous 
and elevated on its upper side. They are also the two stores of the flood of events and 
the  immaterial produce of the earth. The store-places vary according to the produce, 
the bad beneath, the good above. They are also the two pools of the flood of beings, 
which flows in waves towards eternity. As for the pool’s place, it is where the flood 
stops and gathers. That is, the obscene and filthy below, the good and the pure above. 
They are also the two places of manifestation, the one of beneficence and mercy, the 
other  of  wrath  and  grandeur.  Places  of  manifestation  may  be  anywhere;  the  All-
Merciful  One  of  Beauty,  the  All-Compelling  One  of  Glory,  situates  His  places  of 
manifestation where He wishes. 

As for the existence of Paradise and Hell, they have been proved conclusively in 
the  Tenth,  Twenty-Eighth,  and  Twenty-Ninth  Words.  Here,  we  only  say  this:  the 
existence of the fruit is as definite and certain as the existence of the branch; the result 
is  as  definite  as  the  chain;  the  store  as  the  produce;  the  pool  as  the  river;  and  the 
places  of  manifestation  are  as  definite  and  certain  as  the  existence  of  mercy  and 
wrath. 

FOURTH QUESTION 

Passing  (mecazî)  love  for  things  can  be  transformed  into  true  love,  so  can  the 

passing love most people have for this world also be transformed into true love? 

T h e  A n s w e r : Yes, if a person who loves with passing love the transitory 
face of the world sees the ugliness of the decline and transience on that face and turns 
away  from it; if  he searches  for an immortal beloved and is  successful in seeing the 
world’s  other  two,  beautiful,  faces,  of  being  a  mirror  to  the  divine  names  and  the 
tillage of the  hereafter, his illicit passing  love then starts to be transformed into true 
love.  But  on  the  one  condition  that  he  does  not  confuse  with  the  outside  world  his 
inner fleeting, unstable  

 

26

world, which is bound to his life. If like the people of misguidance and heedlessness 
he forgets himself, plunges into the outside world, and supposing the general world to 
be his private world comes to love it, he will fall into the swamp of nature and drown. 
Unless,  extraordinarily,  a  hand  of  favour  saves  him.  Consider  the  following 
comparison which will illuminate this truth.  

For  example,  if  on  the  four  walls  of  this  finely  decorated  room  are  four  full-
length mirrors belonging to the four of us, then there would be five rooms. One would 
be actual and general, and four, similitudes and personal. Each of us would be able to 
change the shape, form, and colour of his personal room by means of his mirror. If we 
were to paint it red, it would appear red, if we were to paint it green, it would appear 
green. Likewise, we could alter it by adjusting the mirror; we could make it ugly, or 
beautiful,  or  give  it  different  forms.  But  we  could  not  easily  adjust  and  change  the 
outer, general room. While in reality the general and personal rooms are the same, in 
practice they are different. You could destroy your own room with one finger, but you 
could not make one stone of the other stir.  

Thus,  this  world  is  a  decorated  house.  The  life  of  each  of  us  is  a  full-length 
mirror. Each of us has a world from this world, but its support, centre, and door is our 
life. Indeed, that personal world of ours is a page and our life  is a pen; many things 
that are written  with it pass to the page of our actions. We  love our world, but later 
see that since it is constructed on our life, like it it is fleeting, transitory, and unstable. 
We  perceive  and  understand  this,  and  our  love  for  it  is  redirected  to  the  beautiful 
impresses of the divine names to which our personal world is the mirror and which it 
reflects; it switches from our world to the manifestations of the names. Moreover, if 
we are aware that that personal world of ours is a temporary seed-bed of the hereafter 
and Paradise, and if we direct our feelings for it like intense desire, love, and greed, 
towards the benefits of the hereafter, which are its results, fruits, and shoots, then that 
passing love is transformed into true love. Otherwise, manifesting the meaning of the 
verse, 

Those who forget God; and he made them forget their own souls. Such are 
the rebellious transgressors,(59:19) 

a person will forget himself, not think of life’s fleeting nature, suppose his personal, 
unstable  world  to  be  constant  like  the  general  world,  and  imagine  himself  to  be 
undying;  he  will  fix  himself  on  the  world  and  embrace  it with  intense  emotions;  he 
will drown in  it and depart. Such  love will be boundless torment and tribulation  for 
him. For an orphan-like compassion, a  

 

27

despairing  softness  of  heart  will  be born of  that  love.  He  will  pity all  living  beings. 
Indeed, he will feel sympathy for all beautiful creatures which suffer decline, and the 
pain of separation, but he will be able to do nothing, he will suffer in absolute despair. 
However,  the  first  man,  who  is  saved  from  heedlessness,  finds  an  elevated 
antidote for the pain of that intense compassion. For in the death and decline of all the 
living  beings  he  pities,  he  sees  that  the  mirrors  of  their  spirits  are  immortal,  for  in 
them  are  depicted  the  perpetual  manifestations  of  the  enduring  names  of  an  Ever-
Enduring  One;  his  compassion  is  transformed  into  joy.  He  also  sees  behind  all 
beautiful  creatures,  which  are  subject to death  and  transience,  an  impress,  a  making 
beautiful,  an  art,  adornment, bestowal,  and  illuminating  that  are  permanent  and  that 
make  perceived  a  transcendent  beauty,  a  sacred  loveliness.  He  sees  the  death  and 
transience to be renewal, the purpose of which  is to increase the beauty, refresh the 
pleasure, and exhibit the art, and this augments his pleasure, his ardour, his wonder. 

                                                                       S a i d  N u r s i

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One 

 

28

The Second Letter 

In His Name, be He Glorified! 

And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

[Part of a letter written in response to a gift from his  
above-mentioned, well-known student.1] 

T h i r d l y : You sent me a present and want to break an extremely important 
rule of mine! Just this time I am not going to say: “I don’t accept presents from you in 
the  same  way  that  I  don’t  accept  them  from  Abdülmecid2  and  Abdurrahman,3  my 
brother and nephew,” because since  you are more advanced than them and closer in 
spirit, I can’t refuse them even if I refuse everyone else’s. But apropos of this, I shall 
tell you the reason for my rule. It is like this: 

The Old Said never accepted favours. He preferred death to becoming obliged to 
people. He never broke that rule of his despite suffering great hardship and difficulty. 
This wretched brother of yours inherited this characteristic from the Old Said, and it is 
not asceticism or artificial self-sufficiency; there are four or five important reasons for 
it: 

                                                 
1 This refers to Hulûsi Yahyagil, “the first student of the Risale-i Nur.” He was from Elazığ in eastern 
Turkey and was then serving as a captain in the army stationed at Eğridir. He first visited Bediuzzaman 
in the spring of 1929. In Bediuzzaman’s Words, “his zeal and seriousness were the most important 
reason for the last of The Words (Sözler) and Letters (Mektûbat) being written. See, Barla Lahikası, 21. 
Also, Necmeddin Şahiner, Son Şahitler, i (1st ed.), 33-55. (Tr.) 
2 Abdülmecid (‘Abd al-Majid) was Bediuzzaman’s younger brother. A teacher of the religious 
sciences, then a Mufti, he translated parts of the Risale-i Nur into Arabic, and Isharat al-I‘jaz and al-
Mathnawi al-‘Arabi al-Nuri (Mesnevî-i Nuriye) from Arabic into Turkish. He died in 1967. (Tr.) 
3 . Abdurrahman was the son of Bediuzzaman’s elder brother, Abdullah. He was born in Nurs in 1903. 
Bediuzzaman called him his spiritual son, student, and assistant. He joined his uncle in Istanbul 
following First World War, and published a short biography of him at that time. He died in 1928. (Tr.) 

 

29

The  First:  The  people  of  misguidance  accuse  religious  scholars  of  securing 
advantage  through  their  learning.  They  attack  them  unfairly,  saying:  “They  are 
exploiting  knowledge  and  religion  to  make  a  living  for  themselves.”  This  has  to  be 
shown to be false in practice. 

The  Second:  We  are  charged  with  following  the  prophets  in  disseminating  the 

truth. In the All-Wise Qur’an those who do this say: 

My reward is only due from God * My reward is only due from God,(10:72, 
etc.) 

and they display independence. Most meaningful in regard to this matter is the verse 
in Sura Ya. Sin.: 

Follow those who ask no reward of you, and who have themselves received 
guidance.(36:21) 

The  Third:  As  is  explained  in  the  First  Word, one  should  give  in  God’s  name 
and take in God’s name. Whereas mostly either the one giving is heedless and gives 
in his own name and implicitly puts the recipient under an obligation, or the recipient 
is heedless; he gives the thanks and praise due to the True Provider to apparent causes 
and is in error. 

The Fourth: Reliance on God, contentment, and frugality are such a treasury and 
wealth they can be exchanged for nothing. I do not want to take things from people 
and  shut  up  that  inexhaustible  treasury.  I  offer  endless  thanks  to  the  All-Glorious 
Provider that since my childhood He has not compelled me to remain under obligation 
and so suffer abasement. Relying on His munificence, I beseech His mercy that I may 
remain faithful to this rule for the rest of my life. 

The Fifth: In consequence of many signs and experiences over the past  year or 
two  I  have  formed  the  firm  conviction  that  I  am  not  permitted  to  accept  people’s 
goods and particularly the gifts of the rich and of officials. Some make me ill. Indeed, 
they are made to be like that; they are made so that I cannot eat them. Sometimes they 
are turned into a form that upsets me. This must be a sort of command not to accept 
the goods of others, prohibiting me from accepting them. Moreover, I have a need for 
solitude, I cannot receive everyone all the time. Accepting people’s gifts necessitates 
considering their feelings and accepting them at times I do not want to. And I do not 
find that agreeable. I find it more agreeable to eat a small piece of dry bread and wear 
clothes patched in a hundred places, and be saved from fawning and artificiality. It is 
disagreeable for me to eat the best quality baklava and wear the finest clothes at the 
hands of others and be obliged to consider their feelings. 

 

30

The Sixth: The most important reason for self-sufficiency is what Ibn Hajar, the 
most  reliable  scholar  of  our  school  of  law,  says:  “If  you  are  not  righteous  it  is 
forbidden to accept something intended for the righteous.”4 

Out of their greed and ambition, the people of this age sell the smallest gift very 
expensively. They imagine a sinful wretch like myself to be righteous or a saint and 
they give him a loaf of bread. If, God forbid, I consider myself to be righteous, it is a 
sign of pride and points to the absence of righteousness. If I do not consider myself to 
be  righteous,  it  is  not  permissible  to  accept  those  goods.  Also,  to  receive  alms  and 
gifts in return for actions that look to the hereafter, means consuming the eternal fruits 
of the hereafter in transitory form in this world. 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

…………………………………………….S a i d  N u r s i 
 

                                                 
4 Ibn Hajar al-Haythami al-Shafi’i, Tuhfat al-Muhtaj li-Sharh al-Minhaj, i, 178. 

 

31

The Third Letter 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

[Part of a letter sent to the well-known student of his.1] 

F i f t h l y : You wrote in one of your letters to me that you wanted to share my 

feelings here, so listen now to one thousandth of them. 

One night at the height of a hundred-storey building in my tree-house at the top 
of a cedar tree, I looked at the beautiful face of the heavens gilded with stars and saw 
an elevated light of miraculousness and brilliant secret of eloquence in the All-Wise 
Qur’an’s oath of, 

So verily I call to witness the planets * That recede, go forth, or hide.(81:15-
16) 

This  verse, which refers to the planets and their  being concealed and spread abroad, 
displays  to  the  gaze  of  observers  an  elevated  embroidery  full of  art  and  an  exalted, 
instructive tapestry. The planets emerge from the sphere of the sun, their commander, 
and entering that of the fixed stars, display fresh embroideries and instances of art in 
the  skies.  Sometimes  they  come  shoulder  to  shoulder  with  another  star  like 
themselves  and  display  a  beautiful  situation.  At  other  times  they  enter  among  the 
small  stars  and  assume  the  position  of  commander.  Especially  in  this  season  after 
evening,  Venus  on  the  horizon,  and  before  the  early  dawn  one  of  its  shining 
companions, display a truly graceful and lovely scene. Later, after carrying out their 
duties  as  inspectors  and  acting  as  shuttles  in  the  tapestries  of  art,  they  return,  and 
entering  the  dazzling  sphere  of  the  sun,  hide  themselves.  Now  they  demonstrate  as 
brilliantly as the sun the majestic dominicality and glittering  

                                                 
1 See,  p. ?,  fn. 1. 

 

32

divine sovereignty of the One who spins this earth of ours and the planets described in 
the  above  verse  with  perfect  order  in  space,  each  like  a  ship  or  aeroplane.  See  that 
majestic dominion  which  has  under  its  sway  ships  and  aeroplanes  a  thousand  times 
larger than the earth, and that travel thousands of times faster. 

You can see from this what an elevated happiness, what a great honour, it is to be 

connected to such a Monarch through worship and belief, and to be his guest. 

Then I looked at the moon and saw a shining light of miraculousless in the verse, 

And the moon, We have measured for her mansions till she returns like the 
old lower part of a date stalk.(36:39) 

Indeed,  the  determining,  rotating,  regulating,  and  illuminating  of  the  moon,  and  its 
positioning in regard to the earth and the sun with precise reckoning is so wonderful, 
so  astonishing,  that  nothing  at  all  could  be  difficult  for  the  All-Powerful  One  who 
orders and determines it thus. It  instructs all beings with  intelligence who behold it, 
conveying to them the idea that the One who makes it thus can surely do everything. 
It follows the sun and does not deviate from its path even for a second, or lag behind 
one iota in  its duties. It makes those who observe it carefully exclaim: “Glory be to 
the  One  whose  art  bewilders  the  mind!”  Especially  when  like  at  the  end  of  May  it 
comes into conjunction with the Pleiades in the shape of a fine crescent, appearing as 
the curved white branch of a date-palm, and the Pleiades appear as a bunch of grapes, 
it conjures up in the imagination the existence of a huge luminous tree behind the veil 
of the green  heavens. As if the pointed tip of one of the tree’s branches  had pierced 
the  veil  and  stuck  out  its  head  together  with  its  bunch  of  grapes  and  become  the 
Pleiades  and  the  crescent  moon,  and  the  other  stars  had  become  the  fruits  of  that 
hidden tree. See the subtlety  and eloquence of the metaphor of: “Like the old lower 
part of a date stalk.” 

Then this verse occurred to me, 

He  it  is  who  has  made  the  earth  submissive  to  you,  so  traverse  you  its 
tracts,(67:15) 

which suggests that the earth is a mastered ship or mount. From this I saw myself high 
up in a huge ship speeding through space. I recited the verse, 

Glory be  to Him  Whom has  subjected  these  to us,  for  we  could never have 
accomplished this,(43:13) 

 

33

which it is Sunna to recite when mounting such means of transport as horses or ships.2 
I  saw that  with  its  motion  the  globe of  the  earth  had  assumed  the position  of  a 
projector showing images as in the cinema; it brought into movement all the heavens 
and began to mobilize all the stars like a magnificent army. It shows such lofty scenes 
that it intoxicates those who think and fills them with wonder. “Glory be to God!”, I 
exclaimed,  “what  numerous,  vast,  strange,  wonderful,  and  elevated  works  are 
performed at so little expense!” Two subtle points concerning belief occurred to me 
after this: 

The First: A few days ago I was asked a question by a guest: the gist of it, which 
inferred doubt, was this: Paradise and Hell are a great distance away. Through divine 
grace,  the  people  of  Paradise  will  pass  through  the  resurrection  like  lightning  or  as 
swiftly as Buraq, and enter Paradise. But the people of Hell,  how will they  go, with 
their ponderous bodies, loaded down with the heavy burdens of their sins?  How will 
they travel? 

What occurred to me was this: if for example all nations are invited to a general 
congress in America and each boards a huge boat and goes there, in the same way, the 
globe, which travels the long distance of twenty-five thousand years in one year in the 
vast  ocean  of  the  universe,  will  take  on  its  people,  travel  to  the  field  of  the 
resurrection, and disembark them. Furthermore, the  Hell at the centre of the earth is 
indicated  by  the  fact  that  the  earth’s  temperature  increases  one  degree  every  thirty-
three metres. That Hell will pour its fire into the Greater Hell, whose temperature of 
two hundred thousand degrees is similar to that described in Hadith and according to 
Hadiths  will  carry  out  some  of  the  duties  of  the  Greater  Hell  in  this  world  and  the 
Intermediate Realm.3 Then at a divine command, the earth will be transformed into a 
better, eternal form, and will become one of the habitations of the hereafter. 

The  Second  Point  which  comes  to  mind:  it  is  the  custom  of  the  All-Powerful 
Maker,  the  All-Wise  Creator,  the  Single  One  of  Unity,  in  order  to  demonstrate  the 
perfection of His power and beauty of His wisdom and proofs of His unity, to perform 
many works with very little and to have large duties carried out by small things. As I 
have  said  in  some  of  the  Words,  if  all  things  are  attributed  to  a  single  being,  they 
become so easy as to be necessary. Whereas if they are attributed to numerous makers 
and causes, as many difficulties arise as to make them impossible. For a single  

                                                 
2 Muslim, Hajj, 425; Abu Da’ud, Jihad, 72, 74; Tirmidhi, Da’wat, 46. 
3 See, Bukhari, Bad’ al-Khalq, 10; Muslim, Janna, 30; Tirmidhi, Jahannam, 7; Musnad, ii, 313. 

 

34

person  like  an  officer  or  master  builder  easily  positions  numerous  soldiers  or 
numerous stones with a single act, a single movement, and obtains a result. But if, in 
order to obtain those positions and results, it is referred to the soldiers in the army or 
the  stones  of  the  dome, which  is  without  support,  they  could be  achieved only  with 
truly numerous acts, numerous difficulties, and great confusion. 

And so, if such acts as the whirling and rotations, the circulation and revolutions, 
and  the  glorification-scattering  promenading  and  excursions  of  the  four  seasons  and 
day and night in the universe are ascribed to unity, then by impelling a single globe 
with  a  single  command,  a  Single  Being  can  obtain  those  elevated  situations  and 
exalted results. He can display the wonders of art in the alternation of the seasons, and 
the marvels of wisdom in the revolutions of day and night, and the graceful spectacles 
in the apparent motions of the stars, sun, and moon. For the army of all beings is His. 
If He wishes, He may appoint a soldier like the earth to be commander of all the stars, 
make  the  mighty  sun  a  lamp  furnishing  heat  and  light  for  his  people,  and  the  four 
seasons, which are tablets of the inscriptions of His power, as shuttles, and night and 
day,  which  are  pages  for  the  writings  of  His  wisdom,  He  can  make  into  bows.  By 
showing each day the moon in a different shape, He makes it a calendar for reckoning 
time. And just as He makes the stars adorned, elegant, shining lanterns in the hands of 
the angels, dancing in ecstasy, so too He demonstrates many instances of wisdom that 
look to the earth. If these situations are not sought from One Being whose command, 
order, law, and regulation address all beings, then all the suns and stars would have to 
cut an infinite distance each day with actual motion and infinite speed. 

It is because of the infinite ease in unity and infinite difficulty in multiplicity that 
businessmen  and  industrialists  give  a  unity  to  multiplicity  and  so  make  things  easy; 
that is, they form companies. 

In  Short: There  are  infinite  difficulties  in  the way of  misguidance,  and  infinite 

ease in the way of unity.   

                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal  One, He is the Eternal One! 

 

35

The Fourth Letter 

In His Name be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

May God’s peace and mercy and blessings be upon you, and upon my brothers 

especially... 

My Dear Brothers! 
I am now on a high peak on Çam Dağı (Pine Mountain), at the top of a mighty 
pine-tree in a tree-house. In lonely solitude far from men, I have grown accustomed to 
this isolation. When I wish for conversation, I imagine you to be here with me, and I 
talk  with  you  and  find  consolation.  If  there  is  nothing to  prevent  it, I  would  like  to 
remain alone here for a month or two. When I return to Barla,1 I shall search for some 
means for the verbal conversation with you I so long for, if you would like it. For now 
I am writing two or three things that come to mind here in this pine-tree. 

The First: This is somewhat confidential, but no secrets are concealed from you. 

It is as follows: 

Some of the people of reality manifest the divine name of Loving One, and with 
its manifestations at a maximum degree look to the Necessarily Existent One through 
the windows of beings. In the same way – but only when he is employed in service of 
the  Qur’an  and  is  the  herald  of  its  infinite  treasuries  –  this  brother  of  yours  who  is 
nothing, but nothing, is given a state whereby he manifests the divine names of All-
Compassionate  and  All-Wise.  God  willing,  the  Words  manifest  the  meaning  of  the 
verse: “He who has been given wisdom, has been given great good.”(2:269) 

The  Second:  This  excellent  saying  about  the  Naqshbandi  Order  suddenly 

occurred to me: “On the Naqshbandi way one has to abandon four  

                                                 
1 Barla: the village in Isparta Province in S. W. Turkey where Bediuzzaman spent eight years in exile, 
from 1926-1934. (Tr.) 

 

36

things: the world, the hereafter, existence, and abandoning  itself.” It gave rise to the 
following thought: 

“On the way of  impotence four things are  necessary: absolute poverty, absolute 

impotence, absolute thanks, and absolute ardour, my friend.” 

Then  the  rich  and  colourful  poem  you  had  written,  “Look  at  the  multicoloured 
page of the book of the universe, etc.” came to mind. I gazed at the stars on the face 
of skies  in the  light of it, and I said to myself:  If only I could have been a poet and 
completed it! Then  I set about it although  I  have  no ability to write poetry or verse, 
and what I wrote was not poetry. I wrote it as it occurred to me. You, my heir, may 
convert it into poetry and put it into verse. This is what occurred to me: 

Then listen to the stars, listen to their harmonious address! 
See what wisdom has emblazed on the decree of its light. 
Altogether they start to speak with the tongue of truth, 
They address the majesty of the All-Powerful, All-Glorious One’s sovereignty: 
We are each of us light-scattering proofs of the existence of our Maker, 
We are witnesses to both His Unity and His Power, 
We are subtle miracles gilding the face of the skies for the angels to gaze upon. 
We  are  the  innumerable  attentive  eyes  of  the  heavens  which  watch  the  earth, 

which study Paradise.2 

We  are  the  innumerable  exquisite  fruits  that  the  hand  of  wisdom  of  the  All-

Glorious and Beauteous One has fastened 

To the  celestial portion of the  tree  of  creation, to  all  the branches of  the  Milky 

Way. 

For the inhabitants of the heavens, 
We are each of us a travelling mosque, a spinning house, a lofty home; 
Each is an illumining lamp, a mighty ship, an aeroplane. 
We are each of us a miracle of power, a wonder of creative art 
Created by the Powerful One of Perfection, the All-Wise One of Glory; 
A rarity of His wisdom, a marvel of His creation, a world of light. 
We demonstrated to mankind innumerable proofs, 

                                                 
2 That is, since innumerable miracles of power are exhibited on the face of the earth, which is the seed-
bed and tillage for Paradise, the angels in the world of the heavens gaze on those miracles, those 
marvels. And like the angels, the stars, resembling the eyes of the heavenly bodies, gaze on the finely 
fashioned creatures on the earth, and in so doing look at the world of Paradise. They look on both the 
earth and Paradise at the same time; they observe those fleeting wonders in an enduring form in 
Paradise. That is to say, in the heavens, there are prospects of both worlds. 

 

37

We made them hear with these innumerable tongues of ours; 
But their accursed unseeing, unbelieving eyes did not see our faces, 
They did not hear our words. 
And we are signs that speak the truth: 
Our stamp is one, our seal is one, 
We are mastered by our Sustainer, 
We glorify Him through our subjugation, 
We recite His Names, 
We are each of us in ecstasy, 
A member of the mighty circle of the Milky Way. 

                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

 

38

The Fifth Letter 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

In  his  Letters  (Maktubat),  Imam-i  Rabbani1  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him),  a 
sun  of  the  Naqshbandi  Order  and  its  hero,  said:  “For me,  the  disclosure  of  a  single 
matter of the truths of faith is preferable to thousands of illuminations, ecstasies, and 
instances of wonder-working.”2 

He  also  said:  “The  final  point  of  all  the  Sufi  ways  is  the  clarification  and 

unfolding of the truths of faith.”3 

He also said: “Sainthood is of three sorts: one is the lesser sainthood, which is the 
well-known sainthood. The others are the middle sainthood and the greater sainthood. 
Greater sainthood is to open up by way of the legacy of prophethood a direct way to 
reality without entering the intermediate realm of Sufism.”4 

He  said  also:  “The  Naqshi  way  is  traversed  with  two  wings;  that  is,  by  having 
firm belief in the truths of faith and by carrying out the religious obligations. The way 
cannot  be  covered  if  either  of  these  two  wings  is  defective.”5  In  which  case,  the 
Naqshi way consists of three veils: 

The  First  and  most  important  is  to  serve  the  truths  of  faith  directly;  Imam-i 

Rabbani travelled this way in his later years. 

The Second is to [advance the cause of] the religious obligations and serve the 

glorious practices (Sunna) of the Prophet (UWBP) under the veil of the Sufi way. 

                                                 
1 Shaykh Ahmad Sirhindi was also known by the titles of Imam-i Rabbani, Ahmad Faruqi, and 
Regenerator of the Second Millennium. He lived in India 971/1563-1034/1624, where he purified the 
religion of Islam of polytheistic accretions and efforts to degenerate it. He is also famous for his efforts 
to reform Sufism. (Tr.) 
2 Imam Rabbani, al-Maktubat, i, 182 (no: 210). 
3 Ibid. 
4 Ibid., i, 240 (no: 260). 
5 Ibid., i, 98 (no: 91); i, 99 (no: 94). 

 

39

The Third is to strive to eliminate the sicknesses of the heart by way of Sufism 

and to journey with the feet of the heart.  

Of these, the first is the equivalent of obligatory, the second, close to obligatory, 

and the third, Sunna. 

Since  the  reality  of  the  matter  is  thus,  my  conjecture  is  that  if  such  persons  as 
Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir Gilani6 (May God be pleased with him) and Shah Naqshband7 
(May God be pleased with him) and Imam-i Rabbani (May God be pleased with him) 
were  alive  today,  they  would  expend  all  their  efforts  on  strengthening  the  truths  of 
faith  and  tenets of  Islam.  For  it  is  through  them  that  eternal  happiness  is  won.  Any 
deficiency  in  them  results  in  eternal  misery.  A  person  without  faith  will  not  enter 
Paradise, but very many will go there without Sufism. Man cannot live without bread, 
but he can live without fruit. Sufism is the fruit, the truths of Islam, basic sustenance. 
In  former  times,  through  spiritual  journeying  from  forty  days  to  as  much  as  forty 
years, a person could rise to some of the truths of faith. But now, if through Almighty 
God’s  mercy  there  is  a  way  to  rise  to  those  truths  in  forty  minutes,  it  surely  is  not 
sensible to remain indifferent to it. 

Thus, people who have studied the thirty-three Words closely state that they have 
opened up just such a Qur’anic way. Since this is a fact, I am of the opinion that the 
Words  so  far  written  about  the  mysteries  of  the  Qur’an  are  a  most  appropriate 
medicine and salve for the wounds of this time, and a most beneficial light for Islam 
as a whole, which has been subject to the assaults of darkness, and a most right guide 
for those wandering bewildered in the valleys of misguidance. 

You know that if misguidance arises from ignorance, it is easy to dispel. Whereas 
if it results from science and learning, it is difficult to eliminate. In former times, only 
one person in a thousand was in the latter category, and only one in a thousand such 
people would be reformed through guidance. For such people fancy themselves. They 
do not know, but they think they do know. I think that Almighty God has bestowed 
the  Words  at  this  time,  which  are  flashes  of  the  Qur’an’s  miraculousness,  as  an 
antidote to this atheistic misguidance. 

                                                                      S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

                                                 
6 Sayyid ‘Abd al-Qadir Gilani (Geylani), known as the Gawth al-A’zam, was a towering spiritual 
figure in the history of Islam. He lived 470¶1077-561¶1166. (Tr.) 
7 Muhammad Baha’uddin Naqshband. He was the founder of the Naqshbandi Order, and died in 
791¶1389 in Bukhara. (Tr.) 

 

40

The Sixth Letter 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

May God’s peace and His mercy and His blessings be upon you and upon your 
brothers so long as day and night continue and the ages follow on in succession and 
the sun and moon endure and the two stars in Ursa Minor are in opposition. 

My  hard-working  brothers,  zealous  friends,  and  means  of  consolation  in  these 

lands of exile known as the world! 

Seeing  that  Almighty  God  has  made  you  shareholders  in  the  notions  He  has 
imparted to my mind, it is surely also your right to share in my feelings. So as not to 
sadden you unduly, I shall skip the excessively grievous part of my loneliness in exile 
and tell you about another part, as follows: 

These  last  two or  three  months  I  have  been  very  much  alone.  Sometimes, once 
every two or three weeks or so, I have a guest with me; the rest of the time I am alone. 
For nearly three weeks now there has been no one working in the mountains near me; 
they have all dispersed. 

One night in these foreign mountains, silent and alone amid the mournful sighing 

of the trees, I saw myself in five exiles of different hues. 

The  first:  because  of  old  age  I  was  alone  and  a  stranger  far  from  most  of  my 
friends, relations, and those close to me; I felt a sad exile at their having left me and 
departed  for  the  Intermediate  Realm.  Then  another  sphere  of  exile  was  disclosed 
within  that  one:  I  felt  a  sad  sense  of  separation  and  exile  at  most  of  the  beings  to 
which I was attached, like last spring, having left me and departed. Then within that 
one  a  further  sphere  of  exile  opened  u,  which  was  that  I  had  been  parted  from  my 
native land and relatives, and was alone. I felt a sense of separation and exile arising 
from that too. Then because of it, the loneliness of the night and the mountains made 
me feel another pitiable exile. And then I beheld my spirit in an overwhelming  

 

41

exile: it was ready to journey to eternity both from this exile and from the temporary 
guest-house  of  this  world.  I  exclaimed  to  myself  suddenly:  My  God!  How  can  I 
endure these exiles and layers of darkness? My heart cried out: 

My Lord! I am a stranger, I have no one, I am weak, I am powerless, I am 

I am without will; I seek recourse, I seek forgiveness, I seek help from Your 

impotent, I am old; 

Court, O God! 

Suddenly  the  light of  belief,  the  effulgence  of  the  Qur’an,  and the  grace  of  the 
Most  Merciful  came  to  my  aid.  They  transformed  those  five  dark  exiles  into  five 
luminous, familiar spheres. My tongue declared: 

God is enough for us, and He is the best disposer of affairs.(3:173) 

While my heart recited the verse: 

And if they turn away, say: God is enough for me, there is no god but He; in 
Him do I place my trust, for He is the Lord of the Mighty Throne.(9:129) 

My mind too addressed my soul, crying out in such distress and terror, saying: 

Cry not out at misfortune, O wretch, come, trust in God! 
For know that complaint compounds the misfortune and is a great error. 
Find misfortune’s Sender, and know it is a gift within gifts, and pleasure. 
So leave complaint and offer thanks; like the nightingale, smile through your 

tears! 

loss. 

If you find Him not, know the world is all pain within pain, transience and 

So why lament at a small misfortune while upon you is a worldful of woe? 

Come trust in God! 

Trust in God! Laugh in misfortune’s face; it too will laugh. 
As it laughs, it will diminish; it will be changed and transformed. 
As Mawlana Jalal al-Din,1 one of my masters, addressed his soul, I said: 

He said: “Am I not your Lord?”, and you assented. So what is  

                                                 
1 Mawlana Jalal al-Din Rumi, born in Balkh in 604¶1208. He migrated to Konya with his father, where 
he died in 672/1273. He was the author of the Mathnawi, and pir of the Mevlevi Order. 

 

42

thanks for that “Yes”? It is to suffer tribulation. And what is the true 
meaning of tribulation? It is to be the door-knocker on the abode of poverty 
and annihilation.2 

So then my soul declared: “Yes, yes, through impotence and reliance on God, and 
poverty and seeking refuge with Him, the door of light is flung open and the layers of 
darkness  are  dispersed.  All  praise  be  to  God  for  the  light  of  belief  and  Islam!”  I 
understood the elevated truth expressed by the  following lines of the  famous Hikam 
Ata’iyya:  

What does he who finds God lose? And what does he who loses Him find?3 

That is, the person who finds Him finds everything, while the person who fails to find 
Him,  can  find  nothing.  If  he  does  find  something,  it  will  only  bring  him  trouble.  I 
understood the meaning of the Hadith, “Tuba (happiness) for strangers in exile,”4and I 
offered thanks. 

My  brothers!  Those  dark  exiles  were  lit  up  through  the  light  of  belief,  yet  they 
still  affected  me  somewhat,  provoking  the  following  thought:  “Seeing  that  I  am  a 
stranger and in exile and shall go to another exile, have my duties in this guesthouse 
been completed? Should I hand over the Words to my brothers and completely sever 
all my ties?” This is why I asked you whether the Words that have been written will 
suffice or whether they are lacking something. That is, have I accomplished my duty 
so that with an easy heart I can cast myself into a light-filled, pleasurable, true exile, 
forget the world and say like Mawlana Jalal al-Din, 

Do you know what the sama’ is? To become unconscious of existence, 
To taste eternity in absolute annihilation?  

Asking, “Can I search for an elevated exile?”,  I troubled you with these questions. 

                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

                                                 
2 Mawlana Jalal al-Din, Diwan-i Kabir, 157 (ghazal no: 251). 
3 Ibn ‘Ata’illah al-Iskandari, Sharh al-Hikam al-‘Ata’iyya, 208. 
4 Muslim, Iman, 232; Tirmidhi, Iman, 132; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 15; Darimi, Riqaq, 42; Musnad, i, 184, 
398; ii, 177, 222, 389; iv, 73. 

 

43

The Seventh Letter 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

May peace be upon you and God’s mercy and blessings for ever and ever. 
My Dear Brothers! 
I gather you told Şamlı Hafız1 to ask me two things: 

THE FIRST 

“Like  the  dissemblers  in  early  times,  the  misguided  of  modern  times  make  the 
marriage  of  God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  with  Zaynab  a 
pretext for criticism, considering it was intended to satisfy the lusts of the soul.” 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  God  forbid,  a  hundred  thousand  times!  Such  vile  doubts 
cannot  be  harboured  against  that  lofty  one!  The  Messenger  (UWBP)  was  such  that 
from the age of fifteen to forty when the blood is fiery and exuberant and the passions 
of the soul enflamed, with complete chastity and purity  he sufficed and was content 
with a single older woman, Khadija the Great (May God be pleased with her) – as is 
agreed by friend and foe alike. His having numerous wives after the age of forty, that 
is, when bodily heat subsides and the passions are quietened, is decisive, self-evident 
proof  for  those  who  are  even  a  little  fair-minded  that  such  marriages  were  not  to 
satisfy  the  carnal  appetites,  but  were  for  other  important  reasons  and  instances  of 
wisdom. 

One of those  instances of wisdom is this: as with his words, the actions, states, 
conduct,  and  deeds  of  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  are  the  sources  of  religion  and  the 
Shari‘a, and provide authority for its injunctions. The  

                                                 
1 Tevfik Göksu; he was known as Şamlı since his father had been an army officer in Damascus for 
twenty years. See, Şahiner, Son Şahitler, i (new ed.), 288. 

 

44

Companions  transmitted  the  outward,  public  things,  and  his  wives  were  the 
transmitters  and  narrators  of  the  private  matters  of  religion  and  injunctions  of  the 
Shari‘a  that  became  clear  from  his  private  conduct  in  the  personal  sphere;  they 
performed  that  function.  Perhaps  half  of  the  personal  matters  of  religion  and  the 
injunctions  concerning  them  come  from  them.  That  is  to  say,  numerous  wives  of 
differing temperament were required to perform this necessary duty. 

Now let us consider his marriage with Zaynab. In connection with the verse, 

Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but [he is] the Messsenger 
of God and the Seal of the Prophets,(33:40) 

which is one of the examples given in the Third Ray of the First Light in the Twenty-
Fifth  Word,  it  is  written  that  given their  many  aspects,  single  verses  state  meanings 
that address all classes of men, each with its own understanding. 

One  class’s  share  of  understanding  of  the  above  verse  is  this:  according  to  a 
sound  narration  based  on  his  own  admission,  Zayd,  the  Noble  Messenger’s  (UWBP) 
servant whom he addressed as “my son,” divorced his proud wife because he did not 
find himself equal to her. That  is to say, with  his perceptiveness, Zayd realized that 
Zaynab had been created with an elevated character different to his and that it was in 
her  nature  to be  a prophet’s  wife.  As  a  spouse  he  found  himself  unequal  to  her  and 
this caused incompatibility, so he divorced her. At God’s command, His Messenger 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) took her. That is, as indicated by the verse,  

We joined her in marriage to you,(33:37) 

which  shows  that  it  was  a  heavenly  contract,  the  marriage  was  out  of  the  ordinary, 
above external relations, and entered into purely on the orders of divine determining. 
Thus, the Noble Messenger (UWBP) submitted to the decree of divine determining and 
was compelled to do so; it was not at the behest of carnal desire. 

The verse, 

In  order  that  [in  future]  there  may  be  no  difficulty  to  the  believers  in  [the 
matter of] marriage with the wives of their adopted sons(33:37) 

comprises an important injunction of the Shari‘a, a general instance of wisdom, and a 
comprehensive,  general  benefit  pertaining  to  this  decree  of  divine  determining;  it 
indicates that adults calling the young “my son” is not forbidden so that it should be 
the cause of ordinances being changed –  

 

45

as  though  “zihar,”  that  is,  a  man  saying  to  his  wife  “you  are  like  my  mother,”  is 
forbidden.  Also,  great  personages  look  to  their  followers  in  fatherly  fashion  and 
address them as such, and divine messengers do the same with their communities. But 
this is because of their positions as leaders and messengers; it is not in respect of their 
human personalities making it inappropriate for them to take wives from among them. 
Another class’s share of understanding the verse is this: a great ruler looks on his 
subjects with paternal compassion. If he is a spiritual king holding both outward and 
inward rule, his compassion will be a hundred times greater than that of a father, and 
his  subjects  will  look  on  him  as  their  father  as though  they  were  his  real  sons. The 
paternal  view is  not easily transformed into that of a husband, nor a girl’s view into 
that of a wife. Since  according to this the public find it  inappropriate that a prophet 
should  take  the  believers’  daughters  in  marriage,  the  Qur’an  repels  such  doubts, 
saying: By  virtue of divine mercy the Prophet  (UWBP) is  kindly towards you and he 
deals with you in fatherly fashion, and in the name of messengership you are like his 
children. But in regard to his human personality he is not your father so that it should 
be inappropriate for him to take a wife from among  you. Even if he calls  you “son,” 
according to the Shari‘a you can’t be his children!” 

 

46

The Eighth Letter 

In His Name! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

There  are  numerous  instances  of  wisdom  in  the  names  of  Most  Merciful  and 
Compassionate  being  included  in  “In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Merciful,  the 
Compassionate”  and  at  the  start  of  all  good  things.  Postponing  the  explanation  of 
these to another time, I shall for now recount a feeling of mine: 

My brother, to me the names of Merciful and Compassionate appear as a light so 
vast  it  embraces  the  whole  universe  and satisfies  all  the  eternal  needs  of  all  spirits, 
and so luminous and powerful it secures a person against all his innumerable enemies. 
The most important means I have found for attaining to these names, these two vast 
lights,  are  poverty  and  thanks,  impotence  and  compassion.  That  is,  worship  and 
realizing one’s neediness. What comes to mind in this connection and I say contrary 
to the great mystics and religious scholars, and even to Imam-i  Rabbani, one of my 
masters, is this: the intense and brilliant emotion the Prophet Jacob (Upon whom be 
peace)  felt  for  Joseph  (Upon  whom  be  peace)  was  not  love  or  passion,  but 
compassion.  For  compassion  is  much  more  acute  and  brilliant  and  elevated  than 
passionate love, and purer and more worthy of the rank of prophethood. Intense love 
and  passion  for  worldly  (mecazî)  beloveds  and  creatures  are  not  fitting  for  the 
elevated  rank  of  prophethood.  This  means  Jacob’s  feelings,  which  the  All-Wise 
Qur’an describes with brilliant eloquence, and were a way of attaining to the name of 
All-Compassionate, were a high degree of compassion. As for passionate love, which 
is  a  way  of  attaining  to  the  name  of  All-Loving,  it  is  more  like  Zulaikha’s  love  for 
Joseph  (Upon  whom  be peace). That  is  to  say,  however  much  higher  the  Qur’an  of 
Miraculous  Exposition  shows  Jacob’s  (Upon  whom  be  peace)  emotions  to  be  than 
Zulaikha’s, compassion is higher than passionate love  

 

47

to the same degree. My master, Imam-i Rabbani, did not consider worldly love to be 
altogether  fitting  for  the  rank  of  prophethood  and  therefore  said:  “Joseph’s  virtues 
pertained  to  the  hereafter,  so  love  for  him  was  not  of  a  worldly  kind  that  it  should 
have been defective.”1 But I say: “Master! That is an artificial interpretation, the truth 
of the matter must be this: Jacob’s was not love but a degree of compassion a hundred 
times  more  brilliant,  more  extensive,  and  more  elevated  than  love.”  Yes,  in  all  its 
varieties,  compassion  is  subtle  and  pure,  while  many  sorts of  love and  passion  may 
not be condescended to. 

Furthermore,  compassion  is  extremely  broad.  Because  of  the  compassion  a 
person feels for his child, he may well feel a kindness towards all young and all living 
beings  even,  and  act  as  a  sort  of  mirror  to  the  comprehensive  name  of  All-
Compassionate. Whereas passionate love restricts its gaze to its beloved and sacrifices 
everything for it. Or else while elevating and praising its beloved, it denigrates others 
and in effect insults them and abuses their honour. For example, someone said: “The 
sun espied my beloved’s beauty and was embarrassed. Not to see it, it veiled itself in 
cloud.” Lover, fine sir! What right do you have to impute shame to the sun, which is a 
light-filled page of eight Greatest Names? 

Moreover, compassion is sincere and wants nothing in return; it is pure and seeks 
no  recompense.  The  self-sacrificing,  unselfish  tenderness  of  animals  towards  their 
young  is  evidence  for  this  at  the  lowest  level.  Passionate  love,  however,  desires 
remuneration  and  seeks  return.  The  weepings  of  passionate  love  are  a  sort  of 
demanding, a desiring remuneration. 

Thus, Jacob’s (Upon whom be peace) compassion, the most brilliant light of Sura 
Yusuf – the most brilliant of the Qur’an’s Suras – points to the names of Merciful and 
Compassionate. It informs us that the way of compassion is the way of mercy. And as 
a salve for the pain of compassion, it induces a person to utter: 

For  God  is  the  Best  of  Protectors  and  He  is  the  Most  Merciful  of  the 
Merciful!(12:64) 

                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

                                                 
1 Imam Rabbani, al-Maktubat, iii, 134 (no: 100). 

 

48

The Ninth Letter 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

 [Again part of a letter he sent to the same sincere student of his.] 

S e c o n d l y :  Your success, endeavour, and eagerness in spreading the lights of 
the  Qur’an  are  a  divine  bestowal,  a  wonder  of  the  Qur’an,  a  dominical  (rabbânî) 
favour.  I  congratulate  you!  Now  that  we  have  come  to  a  discussion  of  wonder-
working, bestowal, and favour, I shall tell you one of the differences between wonder-
working and bestowal. It is like this: 

So  long  as  there  is  no  necessity  for  it,  to  display  wonder-working  is  harmful. 
Whereas  to  make  known  bestowal  is  to  make  known  a  divine  bounty.  If  someone 
honoured with wonder-working knowingly manifests an extraordinary matter and his 
evil-commanding soul is persistent, then since he relies on himself and on his soul and 
what  he  has  disclosed  and  falls  into  pride,  it  may  be  that  Almighty  God  is  drawing 
him on by at first granting him success. If he displays a wondrous act unknowingly; 
for  example,  a  person  has  an  unvoiced  question  and  involuntarily  he  gives  an 
appropriate  answer  and  afterwards  realizes  this,  it  increases  his  confidence,  not  in 
himself but in his Lord and Sustainer. He says: “I have a Preserver who is training me 
better  than  I  could myself,”  and  this  increases  his  reliance  on  God.  It  is  a  harmless 
sort  of  wonder-working.  He  is  not  obliged  to  conceal  it  but  should  not  advertize  it 
intentionally,  because  of pride.  For  since  it  is  apparently associated  with  the  human 
power to act, he may ascribe it to himself. When it comes to bestowal, it is sounder 
than  the  second  sort of  wonder-working,  the  sound  sort,  and in  my  opinion  is  more 
elevated. To make  it known  it  is to make  known  a bounty. The power to act has  no 
connection with it, and the soul does not ascribe it to itself. 

My brother! The divine bounties received by both you and me, particu 

 

49

larly in our service of the Qur’an, which for a long time past I have seen and written 
about,  are  bestowals,  and  to  make  them  known  is  to  make  known  a  divine  bounty. 
This is why – to make known the divine bounty – I am mentioning the success of both 
of us in our service.  I always  knew that  it would encourage  you to offer thanks and 
not make you proud . 

T h i r d l y :  I observe that the most fortunate person in this worldly life is he 
who  sees  the  world  as  a  military  guest-house,  and  submits  himself  and  acts 
accordingly. Seeing it in this way,  he may rise swiftly to the rank of winning God’s 
pleasure, the highest rank. Such a person will not give the price of a lasting diamond 
for  something  as  valueless  as  glass,  doomed  to  be  broken.  He  will  pass  his  life 
uprightly and with pleasure. Yes, matters to do with this world are like pieces of glass 
that  will  be  broken,  while  the  lasting  matters  of  the  hereafter  are  as  precious  as 
flawless  diamonds.  The  intense  curiosity,  fervent  love,  terrible  greed,  stubborn 
desires, and other intense innate human emotions were given to gain the matters of the 
hereafter.  To  direct  them  fervently  towards  the  transitory  things  of  this  world  is  to 
give  the  price  of  eternal  diamonds  for  doomed  fragments  of  glass.  A  point  has 
occurred to me in connection with this, so I shall recount it. It is like this: 

Passionate  love  is  an  ardent  sort of  love.  When  it  is  directed  towards  transitory 
objects, it either causes its owner perpetual torment and pain, or, since the ephemeral 
(mecazî)  beloved  is  not  worth  the  price  of  such  fervent  love,  it  causes  the  lover  to 
search for an eternal one. Then passing love is transformed into true love. 

Man  possesses  thousands  of  emotions,  each  of  which  has  two  degrees,  one 
worldly  (mecazî),  the  other,  true.  For  example,  everyone    feels  anxiety  about  the 
future.  A  person  is  intensely  anxious  about  the  future,  but  then  sees  that  he  has  no 
guarantee  that  he  will  reach  the  future  he  is  so  anxious  about.  Also,  if  it  is  his 
livelihood he is worried about, anyway it is promised, and the brief future is not worth 
such terrible anxiety. So he turns away from the future towards the true future beyond 
the grave, which is long-lasting and which for the heedless has not been promised.  

Man also displays intense ambition for possessions and rank, then he sees that the 
transient  property  which  has  been  put  temporarily  under  his  supervision,  and 
calamitous fame  and  high  rank, which  are  dangerous  and lead  to  hypocrisy, are  not 
worth  such  intense  ambition.  He  turns  away  from  them  towards  spiritual  rank  and 
degrees  in  closeness to  God,  which  constitute  true  rank,  and  towards  provisions  for 
the hereafter, and good works, which are true property. Worldly ambition, which is a 
bad quality, is transformed into true ambition, a lofty quality. 

 

50

And,  for  example,  with  wilful  obstinacy  man  expends  his  emotions  on  trivial, 
fleeting, transient things. Then he sees that he pursues for a year something not worth 
even  a  minute’s  obstinacy.  Also,  just  to  be  obstinate,  he  persists  in  something 
damaging and harmful. Then he sees that this powerful emotion was not given to him 
for such things and that to expend it on them is contrary to wisdom and truth. So he 
utilizes  his  intense  obstinacy, not  on those unnecessary transient  matters, but on  the 
elevated  and  eternal  truths  of  belief  and  essentials  of  Islam  and  service  and  duties 
pertaining to the hereafter. Worldly obstinacy, a base quality, is transformed into true 
obstinacy; that is, ardent steadfastness and constancy in what is right, a fine and good 
quality. 

As these three examples show, if man uses the faculties given to him on account 
of the soul and this world, and behaves heedlessly as though he were going to remain 
here for ever, they will be the cause of bad morals and will be misspent and futile. But 
if he expends the lesser of them on the matters of this world and the more intense of 
them on spiritual duties and tasks pertaining to the hereafter, they become the source 
of  laudable  morals  and  the  means  to  happiness  in  this  world  and  the  next  in 
conformity with wisdom and reality. 

My guess is that one reason the advice and admonitions given at the present time 
have been ineffective is that those offering them say: “Don’t be ambitious! Don’t be 
greedy! Don’t hate! Don’t be obstinate! Don’t love the world!” That is, they propose 
something  that  is  apparently  impossible  for  those  they  address  like  changing  their 
inborn  natures.  If  only  they  would  say:  “Turn  these  emotions  towards  beneficial 
things,  change  their  direction,  their  channel,”  both  their  advice  would  be  effective, 
and they would be proposing something within those persons’ will power. 

F o u r t h l y :  The differences between Islam and belief (or faith–êma\n) have 
been  frequently discussed  by  Islamic  scholars.  One  group  has  said  that they  are  the 
same, while another has said that they are not the same but that you cannot have one 
without  the  other.  They  have  expressed  various  ideas  similar  to  this.  I  myself  have 
understood the following difference: 

Islam is a preference, while belief is a conviction. To put it another way, Islam is 
to  take  the  part  of  the  truth  and  is  submission  and  obedience  to  it,  and  belief  is 
acceptance of and assent to the truth. Long ago I saw certain  irreligious people who 
fervently supported the injunctions of the  

 

51

Qur’an. That is to say, by taking the part of the truth, such people were in one respect 
Muslim and were called “irreligious Muslims.” Then later I saw certain believers who 
did not evince support for the injunctions of the Qur’an nor take the part of them, and 
they reflected the epithet “non-Muslim believers.” 

Can belief without Islam be the means of salvation? 
The Answer: Neither can Islam without belief be a means of  salvation, nor can 
belief without Islam be a means. All praise and bounty is God’s, through the grace of 
the  Qur’an’s  miraculousness  the  comparisons  of  the  Risale-i  Nur  have  shown  the 
fruits  of  the  religion  of  Islam  and  results  of  the  Qur’anic  truths  in  such  a  way  that 
even  if  someone  without  religion  does  not  understand  them,  he  cannot  be 
unsympathetic towards them. And they have demonstrated proofs of belief and Islam 
in  such  powerful  fashion  that  if  even  a  non-Muslim  understands  them,  he  is  sure  to 
assent to them. While being a  non-Muslim, he would believe. Yes, the  Words show 
that  the  fruits  of  belief  and  Islam  are  as  delectable  as  the  fruits  of  the  Tuba-tree  of 
Paradise, and that their results are as agreeable as the pleasures of happiness  in this 
world and  the  next.  They  therefore  induce  in  those who  see  them  and  know  them  a 
feeling of infinite partiality, support, and surrender. Demonstrating proofs as powerful 
as  the  chains  of  beings  and  numerous  as  minute  particles,  they  give  rise  to  infinite 
submission and strength of belief. On certain occasions even, when testifying to belief 
while reciting the invocations of Shah Naqshband, and when saying: “In accordance 
with that we live, in accordance with it we shall  die, and in accordance with it shall 
we be raised up on the morrow,” I have experienced an infinite feeling of partiality. If 
the whole world were given me, I would not sacrifice a single truth of belief. It causes 
me extreme distress to imagine the reverse of a single truth for a minute even. Were 
the  whole  world  to  be  given  me,  my  soul  would  renounce  it  unhesitatingly  for  the 
existence  of  a  single  truth  of  belief.  I  feel  an  infinite  strength  of  belief  when  I  say, 
“We believe in what You have sent through the Prophet, and we believe in what You 
have revealed through the Book, and we assent to it.” I consider the opposite of any of 
the  truths  of  belief  to  be  rationally  impossible,  and  I  look  on  the  people  of 
misguidance as infinitely foolish and crazy. 

I send many greetings to your parents and offer them my respects. Let them pray 
for  me.  They  are  mother  and  father  to  me  since  you  are  my  brother.  And  I  send 
greetings to the people of your village, especially all those who listen to you reading 
the Words. 

                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

 

52

The Tenth Letter 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

 [This consists of the answers to two questions.] 

T  h  e    F  i  r  s  t    is  about  the  footnote  to  the  long  sentence  describing  the 

transformations of minute particles in the Second Aim of the Thirtieth Word.1 

The Clear Book and the Clear Record are mentioned in many places in the All-
Wise Qur’an. Some Qur’anic commentators said they are the same, while others said 
they  are different. Their explanations as to their reality differ, but in short they  said 
they are titles for divine knowledge. However, through the effulgence of the Qur’an I 
have formed this opinion: the Clear Record is a title for a variety of divine knowledge 
and  command  that  looks  to  the  World  of  the  Unseen  rather  than  to  the  Manifest 
World. That is, it looks to the past and the future more than to the present. That is, it 
looks  to  the  origin,  progeny,  roots  and  seeds  of  things  more  than  to  their  external 
existence. It is a notebook of divine determining (kader), the existence of which has 
been proved both in the Twenty-Sixth Word and in a footnote in the Tenth Word.2 

Yes, the Clear Record is the title for an aspect of divine knowledge and the divine 
command. For since the origins, roots, and sources of things result, with the utmost 
order and perfect art, in their [external] existences, they show that they are set in order 
in accordance with a  notebook of the principles of divine knowledge. And since the 
results, progeny, and seeds of things comprise the programmes and indexes of beings 
that will come in  

                                                 
1 See, The Words (Istanbul: Sözler Publications, new edn. 2004), 571-2, fn. 21. (Tr.) 
2 See, Words, pp. 483-6 and 64 respectively. (Tr.) 

 

53

the  future, they surely  infer that they  are miniature collections of divine commands. 
For example, it may be said that a seed resembles the programmes and indexes which 
will impart order to all the parts of the tree, and is like a miniature embodiment of the 
creative commands that specify the index and programme. 

In  short,  the  Clear  Record  resembles  a  programme  or  index  of  the  tree  of 
creation, the branches of which have spread throughout the past and the future and the 
World  of  the  Unseen.  In  this  sense  it  is  a  notebook  of  divine  determining  and  a 
collection of its principles. Minute particles are despatched to their duties and motions 
in the bodies of things through the dictation and decree of those principles. 

As for the Clear Book, it looks to the Manifest World rather than the World of the 
Unseen. That is, it looks to the present more than to the past and the future. It is a title, 
a  notebook,  a  ledger,  of  divine  power  and  will  more  than  of  divine  knowledge  and 
command. If the Clear Record is the notebook of divine determining, the Clear Book 
is the notebook of divine power. 

That  is  to  say,  the  perfect  art  and  order  in  the  beings,  essences,  attributes,  and 
qualities of things show that they are being clothed in existence through the principles 
of a perfect power and the laws of a penetrating will. Their forms are determined and 
specified,  each  is  given  definite  proportions  and  a  particular  shape.  This  means  the 
power and will have a universal, general collection of laws, a great ledger, according 
to which the particular existences and forms of things are cut out, sewn, and clothed. 
The  existence  of  this  notebook,  like  the  Clear  Record,  has  been  proved  in  the 
discussions  about  divine  determining  and  man’s  will.  So  see  the  foolishness  of  the 
people  of  misguidance,  heedlessness,  and  philosophy,  for  they  perceived  the 
Preserved Tablet of creative power and the manifestation, reflection, and similitude in 
things  of  that  perspicuous  book  of  dominical  wisdom  and  will,  but,  God  forbid, 
calling  it  “nature,”  they  made  it  blind.  Thus,  through  the  dictation  of  the  Clear 
Record,  that  is,  through  the  decree  of  divine  determining  and  according  to  its 
principles, on creating, divine power writes the chains of beings, each of which  is a 
sign, on the page of time known as the Tablet of Appearance and Dissolution (Levh-i 
Mahv, Isbat), and causes the motion of particles. 

This means that the motion of particles is a vibration, a movement, arising from 
that writing and copying, as beings pass from the World of the Unseen to the Manifest 
World, from knowledge to power. As for the Tablet of Appearance and Dissolution, it 
is  an  ever-changing  notebook,  a  slate  for  writing  and  erasing,  of  the  Supreme 
Preserved Tablet – which is fixed and  

 

54

constant – in the sphere of contingency, that is, in beings, which constantly manifest 
life  and  death,  existence  and  annihilation;  it  is  the  reality  of  time.  Yes,  time  has  a 
reality  as  does  everything;  the  reality  of  what  we  call  time,  a  mighty  river  flowing 
through the universe,  is like the page  and ink of  power as it writes on the Tablet of 
Appearance and Dissolution. 

None knows the Unseen save God. 

S e c o n d  Q u e s t i o n :  Where will the Great Gathering and Last Judgement  

take place? 

The  Answer:  The  knowledge  is  with  God  alone.  The  elevated  instances  of 
wisdom  the  All-Wise  Creator  displays  in  all  things,  and  His  even  attaching  vast 
instances of wisdom to a single insignificant thing, suggests to the point of being plain 
that  the  globe  does  not  revolve  in  a  circle  aimlessly  and  pointlessly,  but  revolves 
around  something  important;  it  depicts  the  circumference  of  a  vast  arena.  It  travels 
around a huge place of exhibition and hands over its immaterial produce to it; because 
in the future the produce will be displayed there before the gazes of men. That  is to 
say,  it will  fill the circle, the circumference of which  is a distance of approximately 
twenty-five thousand years. Syria will be like a seed, according to one narration;3 the 
arena of the Great Gathering will be expanded out of that region. All the immaterial 
produce of the earth is for now sent to the notebooks and tablets of the arena which is 
beneath  the  veil  of  the  Unseen,  and  in  the  future  when  the  arena  is  opened  up,  the 
earth  will  pour  its  inhabitants  into  it  too.  Its  immaterial  produce  will  also  be 
transposed to the Manifest Realm from that of the Unseen. Yes, as though it were an 
arable field, a spring, or a measure, the earth  has produced crops enough to fill that 
vast  arena,  and  the  creatures  that  will  occupy  it  have  flowed  on  from  the earth;  the 
beings to fill it have departed from the earth. That is to say, the globe is a seed, and 
the arena of the Great Gathering and what it holds, a tree, a shoot, and a store. Just as 
a  point  of  light  becomes  a  luminous  line  or  circle  on  moving  at  speed,  so  with  its 
rapid, purposeful motion, the earth describes a circle of existence, and together with 
that circle of existence and its produce, gives rise to the arena of the Great Gathering. 

Say, the knowledge of it is with God alone.(67:26) 

                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

                                                 
3 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 440; Musnad, iv, 447; v, 3, 5. 

 

55

The Eleventh Letter 

In His Name, 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

 [This letter comprises a significant remedy and points 
out four small gems from the treasuries of four verses.] 

My Dear Brother! 
The All-Wise Qur’an taught my soul these four different matters at various times. 
I  am  writing  them  now  so  that  those  of  my  brothers  who  wish  may  also  receive 
instruction or have a share of them. With regard to subject matter, each is a sample, a 
small jewel, from the treasuries of four different verses and their truths. The form of 
each of the four topics is different, and so are the benefits each yields. 

FIRST TOPIC  

Indeed the wiles of Satan are weak.(4:76) 

O  my  soul  which  is  in  despair  due  to  doubts  and  scruples!  The  association  of 
ideas  and  the  imaginings  or  suppositions  that  occur  to one  are  a  sort  of  involuntary 
expression  or  depiction.  If  they  arise  from  good  and  luminosity,  the  qualities  and 
reality they possess are transposed to an extent to their forms and images – just like 
the sun’s light and heat are transposed to its reflection in a mirror. If such depictions 
are  of  something  evil  and  dense,  their  qualities  and  requirements  cannot  pass  or 
spread  to  their  reflections.  For  example,  the  reflection  in  a  mirror  of  something 
unclean or corrupt is neither unclean nor corrupt. Nor can a snake’s image bite. 

In consequence, to imagine unbelief is not unbelief, and to imagine abuse is not 
abuse.  Particularly  if  it  is  involuntary  or  some  notion  or  speculation  occurs  to  one, 
then it is altogether harmless. Furthermore, according to the Sunni school, the people 
of truth, if the Shari‘a rules that a thing is  

 

56

bad or unclean, it is because it is prohibited by God. Since what we are discussing are 
involuntary  associations  of  ideas  and  imaginings  that  occur  to  one  without  one’s 
consent, they are not subject to such prohibitions. However ugly or unclean the form 
they take, they are not ugly and unclean. 

This  is  a  fruit  of  the  Pine,  Cedar,  and  Black  Poplar  trees  of  Tepelice  in  the 

mountains of Barla, which has been included in The Words1 and not repeated here. 

SECOND TOPIC 

THIRD TOPIC 

The  two  following  matters  are  part  of  the  examples  given  in  the  Twenty-Fifth 
Word2  showing the  impotence  of present-day  civilization  before  the  miraculousness 
of  the  Qur’an.  They  are  two  examples  out of  thousands  proving  how  unjust  are  the 
laws of present-day civilization, which opposes the Qur’an: 

The ruling of the Qur’an: 

And for the man a portion equal of that of two women(4:176) 

is  both  pure  justice,  and  pure  compassion.  Yes,  it  is  justice,  for  the  overwhelming 
majority  of  men  take  a  wife  and  undertake  to  provide  for  her.  As  for  women,  they 
take a husband and load their livelihood on him, and this makes up for the deficiency 
in what they inherit. It is also a mercy, for a weak girl is greatly in need of kindness 
from her father and brothers. The Qur’an decrees that she receives this without worry. 
Her  father  does  not look  on  her  with  misgivings,  thinking  of  her  as  a  harmful  child 
because of whom half of his wealth will go to a stranger. His kindness is untainted by 
anxiety  and  anger.  Her  brother’s  kindness  and  protection  are  free  of  rivalry  and 
jealousy. He does not consider her as a rival who will destroy half the family and give 
a significant part of their property to someone else. His protective and kindly feelings 
for her will not be marred by resentment and hostility. Thus, the girl, who is delicate 
and weak by nature, is apparently deprived of a small part, but in place of it she gains 
inexhaustible wealth in the form of the compassion and kindness of those close to her. 
Also, to give her more than her due with the idea of being more merciful to her than 
divine  mercy,  is  not  kindness  but  a  great  wrong.  Indeed,  the  savage  greed  of  the 
present time, which recalls the appalling cruelty  of the live burial of girl children in 
the Age of Ignorance due to savage jealousy, may possibly  

                                                 
1 See, the Second Station of the Seventeenth Word, Words, 234-6. 
2 See, Words, 419-24. 

 

57

open the way to merciless wickedness. Like this one, all Qur’anic rulings confirm the 
decree,  

And we did not send you but as a Mercy to all the worlds.(21:107) 

FOURTH TOPIC 

And to the mother, a sixth.(4:11) 

This low civilization, which causes injustice by giving daughters more than their 
due, perpetrates  an  even  greater  injustice  by  denying  the  mother  her  right.  Yes,  the 
compassion of mothers is a truly  sweet, subtle, and lovely manifestion of dominical 
mercy,  and  among  the  truths  of the  universe,  is  the  one  most  worthy  of  respect  and 
reverence. A mother is so generous, so compassionate, so self-sacrificing a friend that 
driven by her compassion she will sacrifice all her world, her life, and her comfort for 
her child. A timid hen, even, at the simplest and lowest level of motherhood, will cast 
herself  at  a  dog  or  attack  a  lion  in  order  to  protect  her  young,  through  a  tiny 
manifestation of that compassion. 

To deprive a mother, who is the bearer of such an honourable, lofty truth, of the 
property of her child is an appalling injustice, a savage lack of respect, a compounded 
wrongful insult, an ingratitude for bounties, that causes the divine throne of mercy to 
tremble and adds poison to a brilliant and benefical cure for man’s social life. If those 
human  monsters  who  claim  to  love  humanity  cannot  understand  this,  for  sure  true 
humans can. They know that the All-Wise Qur’an’s command of, “And to the mother 
a sixth,” is pure truth and pure justice. 

                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

 

58

The Twelfth Letter 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

Peace be upon you and upon your companions. 
My Dear Brothers! 
You  asked  me  a  question  that  night  and  I  did  not  reply,  because  it  is  not 
permissible to argue over questions of belief. Your discussion of them had turned into 
a dispute. For now I am writing very brief replies to your three questions, about which 
you  were  arguing.  You  will  find  the  details  in  The Words; the  chemist  wrote down 
which.  But  it  did  not  occur  to  me  to  mention  the  Twenty-Sixth  Word,  about divine 
determining and man’s faculty of will; have a look at that too, but don’t read it like a 
newspaper. The reason I advised the chemist to study of those Words is this: doubts 
about matters of that sort arise from weakness of belief in the pillars of faith. Those 
Words prove all of them. 

FIRST QUESTION 

What wisdom does it spring from, Adam (Upon whom be peace) being expelled 
from Paradise and some of mankind, the sons of Adam, being sent to Hell? What was 
the reason for it? 

T h e  A n s w e r :  The reason for it concerns the charging of duties: the duty 
with  which  Adam  was  charged  yielded  such  results  as  the  unfolding  of  all  human 
spiritual  progress  and  the  revealing  of  all  human  potentialities  and  man’s  essential 
nature  being  a  comprehensive  mirror  to all the  divine  names.  If  he  had  remained  in 
Paradise, his rank would have been fixed like that of the angels; man’s potentialities 
would not have been disclosed. In any case, the angels, with their unchanging ranks, 
are  numerous  and  there  is  no  need  for  man  to  perform  their  sort  of  worship.  Since 
the 
divine  wisdom  required  a  realm  of  accountability  commensurate  with 
potentialities of  

 

59

man, who would traverse infinite degrees, he was expelled from Paradise for his well-
known  sin,  sin  being  the  requirement  of  human  nature  and  contrary  to  that  of  the 
angels. That is to say, just as it was pure wisdom and pure mercy that Adam should be 
expelled  from  Paradise,  so  is  it  just  and  right  that  the  unbelievers  should be  sent  to 
Hell. 

As  is mentioned in the Third Indication in the Tenth Word, the unbeliever only 
committed only  one  sin  in  his  short  life, but  the  sin  comprised  infinite  wrongdoing. 
For  unbelief  is  an  insult  to  the  whole  universe;  it  negates  the  value  of  all  beings, it 
denies  the  testimony  to  divine  unity  of  all  creatures,  and  is  contempt  towards  the 
divine  names,  the  manifestations  of  which  are  to  be  seen  in  the  mirrors  of  beings. 
Therefore,  in  order  to  avenge  the  rights of  beings  on  the  unbeliever,  their  monarch, 
the  All-Compelling  One  of  Glory,  casts  the  unbelievers  into  Hell,  and  this  is  pure 
right and justice. For an infinite crime demands infinite punishment. 

SECOND QUESTION 

Why  are  devils  created?  Almighty  God  created  Satan  and  evil;  what  is  the 

wisdom in it? Isn’t the creation of evil, evil, and the creation of bad, bad? 

T h e  A n s w e r :  God forbid, the creation of evil is not evil, the acquisition of 
(kesb) or desire for evil, is evil. For creation and bringing into existence look to all the 
consequences, whereas such a desire looks to a particular result, since it is a particular 
relation. For example, there are thousands of consequences of rain falling, and all of 
them are good. If due to misuse of their wills some people receive harm from the rain, 
they cannot say that the creation of rain is not mercy or that it is evil. For it is evil for 
them due to their mischoice and inclinations. Also, there are numerous benefits in the 
creation of fire and all of them are good. But if some people are harmed by fire due to 
their  misuse  of  it  and  their  wills,  they  cannot  say  that  the  creation  of  fire  is  evil; 
because it was not only created to burn them. Rather, they made a wrong choice and 
thrust their hands into the fire while cooking the food, and made that servant inimical 
to themselves. 

In Short: A lesser evil is acceptable for a greater good. If an evil which will lead 
to a greater good is abandoned so that a lesser evil should not occur, a greater evil will 
have  been  perpetrated.  For  example,  there  are  certainly  some  minor  material  and 
physical harms and evils in sending soldiers to fight a jihad, but the jihad leads to a 
greater good whereby Islam is saved from being conquered by infidels. If the jihad is 
abandoned due to those lesser evils, the greater evil will come after the greater good 
has gone, and that is absolute wrong. Another example: to amputate a finger  

 

60

which is infected with gangrene and has to be amputated is good and right, although it 
is apparently an evil. For if it  is  not amputated, the  hand will be amputated and that 
would be a greater evil. 

Thus, the creation and bringing into existence of evils, harms, tribulations, satans, 
and  harmful things,  is not evil  and bad, for they  are created for the many important 
results they yield. For example, satans have not been set to pester the angels, and the 
angels cannot progress; their degrees are fixed and deficient. However, in the world of 
humanity the degrees of progress and decline are infinite. There is an extremely long 
distance  through  which  to  progress,  from  the  Nimrod’s  and  Pharaoh’s  as  far  as  the 
veracious saints and the prophets. 

Thus, because of the creation of satans and the mystery of man’s accountability 
and  the  sending  of  prophets,  an  arena  of  trial  and  examination  and  striving  and 
competition  has been opened so that coal-like base spirits may be differentiated and 
separated  out  from  diamond-like  elevated  spirits.  If  there  had  been  no  striving  and 
competition,  the  potentialities  in  the  mine  of  humanity,  resembling  diamonds  and 
coal, would have remained equal. The spirit of Abu Bakr the Veracious at the highest 
of the high would have remained on a par with Abu Jahl at the lowest of the low. This 
means that since the creation of satans and evils looks to vast, universal results, it is 
not  evil  or  bad.  The  evils  and  instances  of  bad  that  arise  from  abuses  and  the 
particular  causes  known  as  man’s  acquisition  pertain  to  his  voluntary  actions  not  to 
divine creation. 

I  f    y  o  u    a  s  k  ?    The  majority  of  humanity  become  unbelievers  due  to  the 
existence  of  Satan;  they  embrace  unbelief  and  suffer  harm,  despite  the  sending  of 
prophets. If, according to the rule “The majority  has the word,” the majority  suffers 
evil  as  a  result,  then  the  creation  of  evil  is  evil  and  it  may  even  be  said  that  the 
sending of prophets is not a mercy. Isn’t that so? 

T h e  A n s w e r : Quantity  has no importance in relation to quality. The true 
majority  looks to quality. For example, if a date-palm has a  hundred seeds and they 
are  not  planted  in  the  earth  and  watered  and  so do  not undergo  a  chemical  reaction 
and  manifest  the  struggle  for  life,  they  remain  a  hundred  seeds  worth  virtually 
nothing.  But  if  they  are  watered  and  are  subject  to  the  struggle  for  life,  and  then 
eighty  out of the  hundred rot due  to their  faulty  make-up, but  twenty  become  fruit-
bearing trees, can  you say that watering them was evil because most of them rotted? 
Of course you cannot say that, for the twenty have become twenty thousand. A person 
who loses eighty and gains twenty thousand suffers no loss, so it cannot be evil. 

Another  example:  a  peahen  lays  one  hundred  eggs  and  they  are  worth  five 

hundred kurush. If the hen sits on the hundred eggs and eighty go bad  

 

61

and twenty  hatch  into peacocks, can  it be  said that the  loss was high and the affair, 
evil; that  it was bad to put the broody  hen on the eggs and an evil occurred? No, it 
was  not  thus,  it  was  good.  For  the  peacock  species  and  egg  family  lost  eighty  eggs 
worth four hundred kurush, but gained twenty peacocks worth eighty liras. 

Thus, through the  sending of prophets and the mystery of man’s accountability, 
and through striving and fighting with satans, in return for the hundreds of thousands 
of prophets and millions of saints and thousands of millions of purified scholars they 
have  gained,  who  are  like  the  suns,  moons,  and  stars  of  the  world  of  humanity, 
mankind  has  lost  the  unbelievers  and  dissemblers,  who  are  numerous  in  regard  to 
quantity, insignificant in regard to quality, and like pernicious beasts. 

THIRD QUESTION 

Almighty  God  sends  calamities  and  inflicts  tribulations;  isn’t  this  an  injustice 

towards the innocent in particular, and animals even? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  God  forbid,  sovereignty  is  His.  He  holds  sway  over  His 
possessions as He wishes. Moreover, a skilful craftsman makes you a model in return 
for a wage and dresses you in a bejewelled garment that he has artistically fashioned. 
Then in order to display his art and skill, he shortens it and lengthens it, measures it 
and trims it, and he makes you sit down and stand up. Can you say to him: “You have 
made the garment that makes me beautiful ugly. You have caused me trouble, making 
me sit down and stand up.”? Of course, you cannot say that. If you did, you would be 
crazy. 

In  just  the  same  way, the  All-Glorious  Maker  has  clothed  you  in  an artistically 
wrought being bejewelled with such faculties as the eye, the ear, and the tongue. To 
display the embroideries of various of His names, He makes  you ill,  He afflicts  you 
with  tribulations,  He  makes  you  hungry,  He  fills  you,  He  makes  you  thirsty;  He 
makes  you revolve  in states  like these. To strengthen the essence of life and display 
the  manifestation  of  His  names  He  makes  you  pass  through  numerous  such 
conditions. As  is  indicated in the comparison, if  you ask: “Why do  you inflict these 
calamities  on  me?”  a  hundred  instances  of  wisdom  will  silence  you.  In  any  event, 
calm, repose, idleness, monotony, and arrest from motion are forms of non-existence, 
and  harm.  Motion  and  change  are  existence  and  good.  Life  finds  its  perfection 
through motion, it progresses by means of tribulations. Life performs various motions 
through the manifestation of the divine names; it is purified, finds strength; it unfolds 
and expands; it becomes a mobile pen to write its own appointed course; it performs 
its duty and acquires the right to receive reward in the hereafter. 

 

62

Briefly,  these  are  the  answers  to  the  three  questions  you  were  arguing  over. 

Explanations of them are to be found in the thirty-three Words. 

My Dear Brother! 
Read this  letter to the chemist and to any of those who heard the argument  you 
deem suitable. And convey my greetings to my new student, the chemist, and tell him 
the following: 

It is not permissible to have a heated discussion about subtle matters of belief like 
these  in  a  social  gathering.  If  it  turns  into  an  uncontrolled  contest,  while  being  a 
panacea  it  becomes  poison.  It  is  harmful  for  both  those  who  speak  and  those  who 
listen.  It  is  permissible  to  discuss  such  matters  moderately  and  fairly,  exchanging 
ideas. And tell him that if doubts occur to him about matters of this sort and he cannot 
find the answer in The Words, he may write to me privately. And tell the chemist that 
it occurred to me that the dream he had about his late father might mean this: since his 
late father was a doctor, he may have helped some people who were close to God, and 
at the time of his death the spirits of those blessed people who were grateful to him 
were seen by the one closest to him, his son, in the form of birds. It occurred to me 
that they came to meet him with a sort of welcome and this would be intercession for 
his spirit.  

I send greetings to all the friends who were together here that night, and I pray for 

them. 

                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

 

63

The Thirteenth Letter 

In His Name! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

Peace on those who follow guidance, and may those who follow their own desires 

be censured! 

My Dear Brothers! 
You frequently ask about my situation and how I am, and why I have not applied 
for my release papers, and concerning my indifference towards politics and the state 
of the world. Since  you have asked these questions on numerous occasions, and also 
ask them implicitly, I am compelled to reply not as the New Said, but in the language 
of the Old Said. 

YOUR FIRST QUESTION  

Are you comfortable? How are you?  
T h e  A n s w e r :  I offer endless thanks to the Most Merciful of the Merciful 
that  He  has  transformed  the  various  wrongs  the  worldly1  perpetrate  against  me  into 
various forms of mercy. It is like this: 

Having  given  up  politics  and  withdrawn  from  the  world,  I  was  living  in  a 
mountain cave and thinking of the hereafter when the worldly wrongfully plucked me 
from it and sent me  into exile. The All-Compassionate and Wise  Creator turned the 
exile into mercy; He transformed the solitude on the mountain, which was unsafe and 
exposed  to  factors  that  would  harm  sincerity,  into  a  retreat  in  the  safe  and  sincere 
mountains  of  Barla.  While  a  prisoner-of-war  in  Russia  I  made  up  my  mind  to 
withdraw into a cave towards the end of my life and prayed for it. The Most Merciful 
of the Merciful made Barla the cave and bestowed the benefits without burdening my  

                                                 
1 . ‘The worldly’ (ehl-i dünya): those people whose view is restricted to the life of this world and who 
disregard the hereafter, or those who sell religion for this world. (Tr.) 

 

64

weak self with the difficulties and troubles of a cave. Only, in Barla there were two or 
three distrustful people, and I suffered torments because of their  groundless  fears.  It 
was as though those friends of mine were thinking of my comfort, but because of their 
suspicions, they harmed both my heart and our service of the Qur’an.  

Moreover, although the worldly  gave the document in question to all the exiles, 
and released the criminals from prison and offered them an amnesty, they wrongfully 
did  not  give  it  to  me.  However,  in  order  to  further  employ  me  in the  service  of  the 
Qur’an  and  make  me  write  to  a  greater  extent  the  lights  of  the  Qur’an  called  the 
Words, my Compassionate Sustainer left me untroubled in this exile and transformed 
it into a great instance of compassion. 

In  addition,  although  the  worldly  left  all  the  influential,  powerful  leaders  and 
shaikhs who could interfere in their world in the towns and cities and permitted them 
to meet with their relatives and everyone, they unjustly isolated me and sent me to a 
village.  With  one  or  two  exceptions  they  allowed  none  of  my  relatives  and  fellow-
countrymen to visit me. But my All-Compassionate Creator transformed that isolation 
into  a  vast  mercy  for  me,  for  it  left  my  mind  clear  and  I  was  able  to  receive  the 
effulgence of the All-Wise Qur’an as it is, free of malice and ill-will. 

Also, the worldly deemed excessive the two commonplace letters I wrote in two 
years at the beginning of my exile. And now even, they are displeased at one or two 
people visiting me purely for the sake of the hereafter once every week or two or once 
a month; and they have harassed me because of this. But my Compassionate Sustainer 
and All-Wise Creator transformed their tyranny into mercy, for He transformed it into 
a desirable solitude and acceptable retreat for me during these Three Months,2 which 
may gain for a person ninety years of spiritual (manevî) life. All thanks be to God for 
all situations, my situation and comfort are thus. 

YOUR SECOND QUESTION 

Why don’t you apply for your release papers? 
T h e  A n s w e r :  I have been sentenced by divine determining (kader) in this 
matter, not by the worldly, so I apply to it. Whenever it gives permission, whenever it 
cuts off my sustenance here, then I shall go. The reality of this is as follows: there are 
two  causes  of  everything  that  befalls  one,  one  apparent  and  the  other,  real.  The 
worldly are the apparent cause; they brought me here. As for divine determining, that 
was the true cause; it sen 

                                                 
2 Şuhûr-u selâse: the holy months of Rajab, Sha‘ban, and Ramadan. (Tr.) 

 

65

tenced  me  to  this  isolation.  The  apparent  cause  acted  wrongfully,  whereas  the  true 
cause  acted  with  justice.  The  apparent  one  thought  like  this:  “This  man  performs 
strenuous services to learning and religion; he may interfere in our world.” Because of 
this  possibility,  they  exiled  me  and  perpetrated  a  threefold  wrong.  Then  divine 
determining saw that my service of religion and learning was not really sincere, so it 
sentenced me to this exile.  It transformed their compounded tyranny  into a multiple 
mercy. Divine determining governs in the question of my exile and it is just, so I have 
recourse  to  it.  The  apparent  cause  certainly  has  some ostensible reasons  and  things, 
but they make it meaningless to apply to them. If they possessed some right or some 
powerful cause, then application could have been made to them too. 

I  have completely  given up their world – may  it  be the end of them – and their 
politics – may it rebound on them – so I do not want to imbue their suspicions with 
reality  by  applying  to  them,  since  the  pretexts  and  suspicions  they  think  up  are  of 
course  baseless.  If  I  had  felt  any  appetite  to  meddle  in  world  politics,  the  reins  of 
which are held by Westerners, it would not have remained thus secret for eight hours 
let alone eight years; it would have leaked out and become known. However, for eight 
years I have felt no desire to read a newspaper, and I have not read one. And for four 
years  I  have  been  here  under  surveillance,  and  there has  not been  the  slightest  sign 
that  I  have  meddled  in  politics.  That  is  to  say,  service  of  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  is 
superior to all politics so that it does not let a person condescend to [concern himself 
with] world politics, which consists mostly of falsehood. 

The second reason for my not applying is this: to claim a right before those who 
suppose  wrong  to  be  right,  is  a  sort  of  wrong.  I  do  not  want  to  perpetrate  such  a 
wrong. 

YOUR THIRD QUESTION  

Why  are  you  so  indifferent  towards  world  politics?  You  don’t  change  your 
attitude  at  all,  even  though  so  many  things  are  happening.  Does  this  mean  you 
consider them to be good, or are you frightened, so remain silent? 

T h e  A n s w e r :  Service of the All-Wise Qur’an severely prohibited me from 
the world of politics. It even made me forget about it. For the whole story of my life 
testifies that fear has never taken me by the hand and held me back from taking a way 
I deemed right, nor could it. And why should I be frightened? I  have  no connection 
with the world apart from the appointed hour. I have no family or children to think of, 
nor any property. I don’t belong to a noble family that I should consider its honour. I 
would  

 

66

not  want  to  preserve  worldly  glory  and  renown  which  consists  of  hypocritical, 
undeserved fame; may God bless those who help in destroying it! So all that remains 
is my death and that is in the hands of the All-Glorious Creator. Who has the power to 
intervene in it before the time of its coming? Anyway we are one of those who prefer 
honourable death to degradation in life. Someone resembling the Old Said spoke the 
following  lines:  “We  are  those  for  whom there is  no  middle  way;  For us  is  either  a 
place of honour among the people, or the grave.”3 

In any event, service of the Qur’an prohibits me from thinking of socio-political 
life. It is like this: human life is a journey. I saw at this time through the light of the 
Qur’an  that  the  way  has  entered  a  swamp.  The  caravan  of  mankind  is  stumbling 
forward  in  stinking,  filthy  mud.  Part of  it  is  travelling  a  safe  way. Another  part  has 
found certain means to save itself as far as is possible from the muddy swamp. But the 
great majority  are travelling  in darkness  in the midst of it. Twenty per cent suppose 
the filthy mud to be musk and ambergris because they are drunk, and are smearing it 
over their faces and eyes; they stumble on till they drown in it. However, eighty per 
cent  understand  it  is  a  swamp  and  realize  it  is  stinking  and  filthy,  but  they  are 
bewildered and cannot discern the safe way. There are two solutions: 

The First: to bring the drunken twenty per cent to their senses with a club. 
The Second to point out the safe way to the bewildered by showing them a light. 
I  look  and  see  that  eighty  people  are  brandishing  clubs  at  the  twenty  per  cent, 
while the light is not properly shown to the unhappy, bewildered eighty. Even if it is 
shown,  since  those  showing  it  hold  both  the  club  and  the  light  in  the  same  hand,  it 
does  not  inspire  confidence.  The  bewildered  person  anxiously  wonders:  “Does  he 
want  to  attract  me  with  the  light  then  hit  me  with  the  club?”  And  sometimes  when, 
due to some defect, the club is broken, the light flies away too or else is extinguished. 
Thus,  the  swamp  is  mankind’s  dissolute  social  life,  which  breeds  heedlessness 
and  misguidance.  The  drunkards  are  those  obdurate  people  who  take  delight  in 
misguidance, while the bewildered ones are those who detest misguidance but cannot 
extract themselves from it. They want to be saved, but cannot find the way; they are 
confused. As for the clubs, they are the political currents, and the light, the truths of 
the Qur’an. Light can 

                                                 
3 Abu Firas al-Hamadani. (Tr.) 

 

67

not  be  disputed,  nor  can  enmity  be  felt  towards  it.  No  one  can  detest  it  apart  from 
Satan  the  Accursed.  So  that  I  might  take  up  the  Qur’an’s  light,  I  declared:  “I  seek 
refuge with God from Satan and from politics” and threw away the club of politics; I 
embraced  the  light  with  both  hands.  I  saw  that  among  the  political  movements  are 
lovers  of  those  lights  in  both  the  opposition  and  the  supporters.  No  side  or  group 
should cast aspersions on or hold back from the lights of the Qur’an that are held up, 
or from the teachings of the Qur’an, which are far superior to all political currents and 
partisanship  and  are  exempt  from  and  free  of  all  their  biased  considerations.  Only 
satans  in  human  form  or  animals  in  human  dress  would  do  so  since  they  imagine 
irreligion and atheism to be politics and support them. 

All  praise  be  to  God, because  I  withdrew  from politics,  I  did  not  reduce  to  the 
value of glass fragments the truths of the Qur’an, which are as precious as diamonds, 
and  leave  myself  open  to  accusations of  political  propaganda.  Indeed,  the diamonds 
increase their value in the view of all groups in brilliant fashion. 

And  they  shall  say:  “All  praise  be  to  God,  who  has  guided  us  to  this 
[felicity];  never  could  we  have  found  guidance,  had  it  not  been  for  the 
guidance of God; indeed it was the truth that the prophets of our Sustainer 
brought to us!”(7:43) 

                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

The Fourteenth Letter 
was not written 

*  *  * 

*  *  * 

 

 

68

The Fifteenth Letter 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

My Dear Brother! 

YOUR FIRST QUESTION   

Why  didn’t  the  Companions  discover  the  troublemakers  with  the  eye  of 
sainthood,  with  the  result  that  three  of  the  four  Rightly-Guided  Caliphs  were 
martyred? For it is said that even the lesser Companions were greater than the greatest 
saints? 

T h e  A n s w e r :  This matter comprises two stations. 

First Station 

The  question  may  be  solved  by  explaining  as  follows  a  subtle  mystery  of 

sainthood:  

The Companions’ sainthood, known as the greater sainthood, is one that proceeds 
from  the  legacy  of  prophethood,  and  passing  directly  from  the  apparent  to  reality 
without travelling the intermediate path, looks to the unfolding of divine immediacy. 
Although this way of sainthood is very short, it is extremely elevated. Its wonders are 
few,  but  its  virtues  are  many.  Illuminations  and  wonder-workings  are  to  be 
encountered  on  it  only  infrequently.  Moreover,  the  wonder-working  of  the  saints  is 
mostly  involuntary;  wonders  appear  from  them  unexpectedly  as  a  divine  bestowal. 
And  the  majority  of  such  illuminations  and  wonder-workings  occur  during  their 
spiritual  journeying,  as  they  traverse  the  intermediate  realm  of  the  Sufi  path;  they 
manifest  those  extra-ordinary  states  because  they  have  withdrawn  to  a  degree  from 
ordinary humanity. As for the Companions, due to the reflection, attraction, and elixir 
of the company of prophethood, they were not obliged to traverse the vast sphere of 
spiritual  journeying  of  the  Sufi  way.  They  were  able  to  pass  from  the  apparent  to 
reality in one step,  

 

69

through one conversation with the Prophet (UWBP). For instance, there are two ways 
of reaching the Night of Power, if it was last night: 

One  is  to  travel and  wander  for  a  year  to reach  it.  One  has to  traverse  a  year’s 
distance to gain proximity to it. This is the method of those who embark on spiritual 
journeying, the way taken by most of those who follow the Sufi path. 

The second is to slip free of and be divested of the sheath of corporeality, which 
is restricted by time, to rise in the spirit and see the Night of Power, which was last 
night,  together  with  the  night  of  the  ‘Id,  which  is  the  day  after  tomorrow,  as being 
present like today. For the spirit is not restricted by time. When the human emotions 
rise to the level of the spirit, present time expands. Time, which for others consists of 
the past and the future, is as though the present for such a person. 

According to this comparison, to reach the Night of Power one has to rise to the 
level  of  the  spirit  and  see  the  past  as  though  it  were  the  present.  Essentially,  this 
obscure mystery is the unfolding of divine immediacy. For example, the sun is near to 
us, for its light and heat are present in the mirror we are holding. But we are far from 
it. If we perceive its immediacy from the point of view of luminosity, and understand 
our relation to its reflection in our mirror, which is a similitude; if we come to know it 
by  that  means  and  know  what  its  light,  heat,  and  totality  are,  its  immediacy  is 
unfolded to us and we recognize it as close to us and we become connected to it. If we 
want to draw near to it and get to know it in respect of our distance from it, we are 
compelled  to  embark  on  an  extensive  journeying  in  the  mind,  so  that  by  means  of 
thought and the laws of science we can rise to the skies in the mind and conceive of 
the sun there, and through lengthy scientific investigation understand its light and heat 
and  the  seven  colours  in  its  light.  Only  then  may  we  attain  to  the  non-physical 
proximity the first man attained with little thought through his mirror.  

Thus,  like  this  comparison,  the  sainthood  of  prophethood  and  of  the  legacy  of 
prophethood  looks  to  the  mystery  of  the  unfolding  of  divine  immediacy.  The  other 
sainthood  proceeds  mostly  on  the  basis  of  proximity,  and  is  compelled  to  traverse 
numerous degrees in spiritual journeying. 

Second Station 

The persons who were the cause of those events and instigated the trouble did not 
consist  of  a  few  Jews  so  that  having  discovered  them  the  trouble  could  have  been 
averted.  For  with  numerous  different  peoples  entering  Islam,  many  mutually 
conflicting  currents  and  ideas  had  confused  the  situation.  Particularly  since  the 
national pride of some of them had been terribly  

 

70

wounded  by  ‘Umar’s  (May  God  be  pleased  with  him)  blows;  they  were  waiting  to 
take their revenge. For both their old religions  had been rendered null and void and 
their old rule and sovereignty, the source of their pride, been swept away. Knowingly 
or  unknowingly,  they  were  emotionally  in  favour  of  seeking  vengeance  on  Islamic 
rule. It was therefore said that some clever, scheming dissemblers like the Jews took 
advantage  of  that  state  of  society.  That  is  to  say,  it  could  have  been  averted  by 
reforming the society and the various ideas of the time, not by discovering one or two 
troublemakers. 

I f  i t  i s   a s k e d :  Why, with that piercing  eye of sainthood of his, didn’t 
‘Umar (May  God be pleased with  him) see  his murderer, Firuz, who was  with  him, 
although while in the pulpit he said to one of his commanders called Sariya who was 
a  month’s  distance  away,  “Sariya!  The  mountain,  the  mountain!”,1  making  Sariya 
hear it and in wondrous fashion causing a strategic victory – showing how penetrating 
his sight was? 

T h e  A n s w e r : Our answer is that of the Prophet Jacob (UWP). That is, Jacob 
was asked: “How did you perceive the odour of Joseph’s shirt from Egypt when you 
did  not  see  him  in  the  well  at  Cana’an  close  by?”  He  replied:  “This  ability  is  like 
lightning;  sometimes  it  appears  and  sometimes  it  is  hidden.  Sometimes  we  are  as 
though seated on the highest spot and can see everwhere, and sometimes we can’t see 
even the arch of our foot.” 

In Short: Man is free to act as he wills, still, in accordance with the verse, “You 
do  not  will  it  except  as  God  wills,”(76:30)  divine  will  is  fundamental,  divine 
determining  (kader)  is  dominant.  Divine  will  restores  man’s  will.  It  confirms  the 
statement,  “The  eye  no  longer  sees  when  divine  determining  acts;”2  that  is,  when 
divine determining speaks, it is beyond human power to speak; man’s will falls silent. 

THE GIST OF YOUR SECOND QUESTION   

What was the true nature of the wars that started in the time of ‘Ali (May God be 
pleased with him)? What should we call those who took part in them, and those who 
died and those who killed? 

T h e  A n s w e r :  The war between ‘Ali and Talha, and Zubayr and ‘A’isha  

                                                 
1 Tabari, Ta’rikh al-‘Umam wa’l-Muluk, ii, 380; Abu Na’im, al-Dala’il, iii, 210, 211; Bayhaqi, Dala’il 
al-Nubuwwa, vi, 370; Suyuti, Ta’rikh al-Khulafa’, 128; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, vii, 131; al-
‘Asqalani, al-Isaba, ii, 3; Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa, 101; Suyuti, al-Durar al-
Muntathira, 182, No: 462; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 380. 
2 Bayhaqi, Shu’ab al-Iman, i, 233. See also, Musnad, v, 234; al-Haythami, Majmu’ al-Zawa’id, x, 146; 
Ibn Hajar, al-Matalib al-‘Aliya, iii, 234; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 405, 406. 

 

71

the Veracious (May God be pleased with all of them), called the Event of the Camel, 
was a struggle between pure justice and relative justice. It was as follows: 

‘Ali  took  pure justice  as  his  guiding  principle  and  in  his  judgement of  the  Law 
proceeded  on  that  basis,  as  was  the  case  in  the  time  of  the  Caliphs  Abu  Bakr  and 
‘Umar. Those who opposed him said that previously the purity of Islam had permitted 
pure  justice,  but  since  with  the  passage  of  time  various  peoples  whose  Islam  was 
weak had joined Islamic society, to apply pure justice was extremely difficult. For this 
reason, their judgement of the Law was based on relative justice, known as the lesser 
of  two  evils.  Dispute  over  interpretation  of  the  Law  led  to  war.  Since  the 
interpretations had been purely for God’s sake and for the benefit of Islam, and war 
had  broken  out  because  of  interpretation  of  the  Law,  we  may  surely  say  that  both 
those who killed and those who were killed won Paradise, and both acted rightfully. 
‘Ali’s interpretation was accurate, just as those who opposed him were  in error, but 
they still did not deserve punishment. For if a person makes a correct interpretation, 
he gains two rewards, but if he fails to do this he still earns one reward, the reward for 
making  an  interpretation,  which  is  a  form  of  worship.  He  is  forgiven  his  error.  A 
learned person who was widely known amongst us and whose pronouncements were 
authoritative wrote in Kurdish: “Don’t gossip about the war between the Companions, 
for both killer and killed were destined for Paradise.” 

Pure  justice  and  relative  justice  may  be  explained  as  follows:  according  to  the 

allusive meaning of the verse, 

If any one slew a person – unless it be for murder or for spreading mischief 
in the land – it would be as if he slew the whole people,(5:32) 

the rights of an  innocent man cannot be cancelled for the sake of all the people. An 
individual may  not be sacrificed for the  good of all. In the  view of Almighty God’s 
compassion, right is right, there is no difference between great and small. The small 
may  not  be  annulled  for  the  great.  Without  his  consent,  the  life  and  rights  of  an 
individual  may  not  be  sacrificed  for  the  good  of  the  community.  If  he  consents  to 
sacrifice them in the name of patriotism, that is a different matter. 

As for relative justice, a particular is sacrificed for the good of the universal; the 
rights of an individual are disregarded in the  face of the community. The attempt is 
made to apply a sort of relative justice as the lesser of two evils. But if it is possible to 
apply pure justice, to apply relative justice is wrong and may not be undertaken. 
Thus, Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) judged it possible to  

 

72

apply pure justice as in the time of the Caliphs Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, and he set up the 
Islamic Caliphate on that basis. Those who opposed him and objected to him said that 
it was  impossible because of the  great difficulties, and judged according to the Law 
that they should proceed with relative justice. The other historical reasons are not true 
reasons, they are pretexts. 

I f  y o u  a s k : What was the reason for Imam ‘Ali’s lack of success in regard to 
the  Islamic  Caliphate  relatively  to  his  predecessors,  despite  his  extraordinary 
capabilities, unusual intelligence, and great deservedness? 

T h e  A n s w e r : That blessed person was deserving of weighty duties other 
than  politics  and  rule.  If  he  had  been  completely  successful  in  politics  and 
government, he would have been unable to acquire fully the meaningful title of King 
of  Sainthood.  Whereas  he  won  a  spiritual  rule  far  surpassing  the  external,  political 
Caliphate,  and  became  a  Universal  Master;  in  fact,  his  spiritual  rule  will  continue 
even until the end of the world. 

As for his war with Mu‘awiya at Siffin, it was a war over the Caliphate and rule. 
That  is  to  say,  Imam  ‘Ali  gave  priority  to  the  injunctions  of  religion,  the  truths  of 
Islam, and the  hereafter, and sacrificed some of the  laws of  government  and pitiless 
demands  of  politics.  Whereas  Mu‘awiya  and  his  supporters,  in  order  to  strengthen 
Islamic society with their governmental policies, left aside resoluteness and favoured 
permissiveness; they  supposed  they  were  obliged  to  in  the  political  realm;  choosing 
permissiveness, they fell into error. 

As for Hasan and Husain’s struggle against the Umayyads, it was a war between 
religion  and  nationalism.  That  is,  the  Umayyads  founded  the  Islamic  state  on  Arab 
nationalism and put the bonds of nationalism before those of Islam, causing harm in 
two respects: 

The First Respect: They offended the other nations and frightened them off. 
The Other: The principles of racialism and nationalism are not based on justice 
and right, so are unjust and wrongful. They do not proceed on justice. For a ruler of 
racialist  leanings  gives preference  to  people  of  the  same race  and  cannot  act  justly. 
According to the clear decree of, “Islam abrogated the tribalism of Ignorance. There is 
no  difference  between  an  Abyssinian  slave  and  a  leader  of  the  Quraish,  once  they 
have  accepted  Islam,”3  the  bonds  of  nationalism  may  not  be  set  up  in  place  of  the 
bonds of religion. If they are, there will be no justice; right will disappear. 

                                                 
3 See, Bukhari, Ahkam, 4; ‘Imara, 36, 37; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 5; Tirmidhi, Jihad, 28; ‘Ilm, 16; Nasa’i, 
Bay’a, 26; Ibn Maja, Jihad, 39; Musnad, iv, 69, 70, 199, 204, 205; v, 381; vi, 402, 403. 

 

73

Thus, Husain accepted the bonds of religion as fundamental and struggled against 

those others as someone executing justice, until he attained the rank of martyrdom. 

I f  i t  i s  a s k e d : If he was so right and just, why wasn’t he successful? Also, 
why did divine determining and divine mercy permit them to meet with the tragic end 
they did? 

T h e  A n s w e r :  It was not Husain’s close supporters that harboured feelings 
of revenge towards the Arab nation, but members of other nations who had joined his 
community,  out  of  their  wounded  national  pride.  They  caused  harm  to  the  pure, 
shining creeds of Husain and his supporters, and were the cause of their defeat. 

The wisdom in their tragic end from the point of view of divine determining was 
this:  Hasan  and  Husain  and  their  family  and  descendants  were  destined  to  hold 
spiritual rule. It is extremely difficult to bring together worldly rule and spiritual rule. 
Therefore, divine determining made them feel disgust at the world; it showed them its 
ugly  face  so that they should cease to feel  any attachment to it  in their  hearts. They 
lost  a  temporary,  superficial  rule,  but  were  appointed  to  a  splendid,  permanent 
spiritual  rule.  They  became  the  authorities  of  the  spiritual  poles  among  the  saints 
instead of commonplace governors. 

YOUR THIRD QUESTION 

received? 

What  was  the  wisdom  in  the  tragically  cruel  treatment  those  blessed  persons 

T h e  A n s w e r : As was explained above, there were three main reasons for 

the pitiless cruelty Husain’s opponents displayed during Umayyad rule: 

One was the heartless principle of politics: “Individuals may be sacrificed for the 

welfare of the government and preservation of public order.” 

The Second was the cruel rule of nationalism: “Everything may be sacrificed for 
the  well-being  of  the  nation.”  For  his  opponents’  rule  was  based  on  racialism  and 
nationalism. 

The  Third:  The  traditional  vein  of  rivalry  between  the  Umayyads  and  the 
Hashimites  was  present  in  some  people  like  Yazid,  and  he  displayed  a  merciless 
ability to be cruel. 

A Fourth Reason: The Umayyads made Arab nationalism the basis of their rule, 
and they looked on the members of other nations – who were found among Husain’s 
supporters  –  as  slaves.  This  had  wounded  their  national  pride.  So,  since  the  other 
nations  had  joined  Husain’s  community  with  mixed  intentions  and  to  take  revenge, 
they felt excessively affronted  

 

74

at the Umayyad’s fanatic nationalism and were the cause of that terrible well-known 
tragedy. 

The  four  reasons  mentioned  above  are  outward  and  apparent.  When  considered 
from  the  point  of  view  of  divine  determining,  the  results  pertaining  to  the  hereafter 
and  spiritual  rule  and  spiritual  progress  that  the  tradegy  won  for  Husain  and  his 
relatives  were of  such  high  worth  that  the  distress  they  suffered due to  it  was  made 
easy and cheap. It resembled a soldier who dies after an hour’s torture and becomes a 
martyr: he attains a rank so high that anyone else could reach it only if they strove for 
ten  years.  If  the  soldier  were  to be asked  about  it  after  he  had died,  he  would reply 
that he had gained much for very little. 

THE GIST OF YOUR FOURTH QUESTION 

After Jesus (Upon whom be peace) kills the Antichrist (Dajjal) at the end of time, 
most people will  enter the true religion. But it says  in  some narrations: “The end of 
the world will not occur as long as there remain on the earth people who say, Allah! 
Allah!”4  So  how  after  most  people  have  come  to  believe,  will  they  become 
unbelievers? 

T h e  A n s w e r : Some people whose belief is weak regard as unlikely what is 
narrated in the sound Hadith: “Jesus (Upon whom be peace) will come and will act in 
accordance with the Shari‘a of Islam. He will kill the Dajjal.”5 But when its meaning 
is explained, it is seen that there is nothing unlikely about it. It is as follows: 

What this Hadith and those about the Sufyan and the Mahdi6 mean is this: at the 

end of time two atheistic movements will gain strength. 

One  of  them:  Behind  a  screen  of  duplicity,  a  fearsome  individual  named  the 
Sufyan will deny the messengership of Muhammad  (UWBP), and coming to lead the 
dissemblers,  will  try  to  destroy  the  Islamic  Shari‘a.  To  oppose  him,  a  luminous 
individual called Muhammad Mahdi of the Family of the Prophet (UWBP) will assume 
leadership of the people of sainthood and perfection, who are bound to the luminous 
line of the Prophet’s (UWBP) Family, and he will kill the current of dissemblers, which 
will consist of the collective personality of the Sufyan, and scatter it. 

The Second Current: A tyrannical movement born of naturalist philos 

                                                 
4 Muslim, Iman, 234; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 35; Musnad, ii, 107, 201, 259; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, vi, 494.   
5 , Anbiya’, 49; Muslim, Iman, 242-7; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 62; Musnad, iv, 226. 
6 For the Sufyan, see, al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 520; Bukhari, Fitan, 101-2; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 62; 
Musnad, iii, 115, 211, 228, 249-50; v, 38, 404-5; vi, 139-40. For the Mahdi, Bukhari, Anbiya’, 49; 
Muslim, Iman, 244-5; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 33; Musnad, ii, 336; iii, 368. 

 

75

ophy will gradually grow strong at the end of time and spread by means of materialist 
philosophy, going so far as to deny God. A savage who does not recognize the king or 
accept  that  the  officers  and  soldiers  in  the  army  are  his  soldiers  ascribes  a  sort  of 
kingship and rulership to everyone and to all the  soldiers. In  just the same way, the 
members of that movement, who deny God, each ascribes dominicality to his soul like 
a little Nimrod. And the greatest of them, the Dajjal, who will come to lead them, will 
manifest  awesome  wonders,  a  sort  of  spiritualism  and  hypnosis;  he  will  go  even 
further, and imagining his tyrannical, superficial rule to be a sort of dominicality, he 
will proclaim  his  godhead. It is  clear  just what  foolish buffoonery  it is  for impotent 
man,  who  may  be  defeated  by  a  fly  and  cannot  create  even  a  fly’s  wing,  to  claim 
godhead. 

At that point, just when the movement appears to be very strong, the religion of 
true Christianity, which comprises the collective personality of Jesus (Upon whom be 
peace), will emerge. That is, it will descend from the skies of divine mercy. Present-
day Christianity will be purified in the face of that reality; it will cast off superstition 
and  distortion,  and  unite  with  the  truths  of  Islam.  Christianity  will  in  effect  be 
transformed into a sort of Islam. Following the Qur’an, the collective personality of 
Christianity will be in the rank of follower, and Islam, in that of leader. True religion 
will become a mighty force as a result of its joining it. Although defeated before the 
atheistic  movement  while  separate,  as  a  result  of  their  union  Christianity  and  Islam 
will acquire the capability to defeat and rout it. Then the person of Jesus (Upon whom 
be peace), who is present with his human body in the world of the heavens, will come 
to lead the current of true religion, as, relying on the promise of One Powerful Over 
All Things, the Bringer of Sure News has said.7 Since he has told of it, it is true, and 
since  the  One  Powerful  Over  All  Things  has  promised  it,  He  will  certainly  bring  it 
about. 

Indeed, it is  not far from the wisdom of the All-Wise One of Glory who all the 
time sends the angels to the earth from the heavens, sometimes in human form – like 
Gabriel  appearing  in  the  form  of  Dihya8  –  and  sends  spirit  beings  from  the  Spirit 
World making them appear in human form, and even sends the spirits of most of the 
dead saints to the world with similitudes of their bodies, it would not be far from His 
Wisdom – even if  

                                                 
7 See, Qur’an, 4:159. See also, Bukhari, Anbiya’, 49; Muslim, Iman, 242-7; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 62; 
Musnad, iv, 226. 
8 See, Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 100; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 
276. 

 

76

he  were  not  alive  and present  with  his  body  in the  skies  of  the  world  and  had  truly 
died  and  departed  for  the  furthest  corner  of  the  hereafter  –  to  clothe  Jesus  (Upon 
whom  be  peace)  in  his  body  and  send  him  to  the  world,  so  to bring  the  religion  of 
Jesus  to  a  fitting  conclusion;  for  such  a  momentous  result.  Indeed  He  promised  it 
because  His  wisdom  required  it  to  be  thus,  and  since  He  promised it,  He  will  most 
certainly send him. 

When Jesus (Upon whom be peace) comes, not everyone will know him to be the 
true Jesus.  His  elect  and  those  close  to  him  will  recognize  him  through  the  light  of 
belief. It will not be self-evident so that everyone will recognize him. 

Q u e s t i o n : There are narrations which say: “The Dajjal has a false paradise 
where he sends those who follow him, and he also has a false hell into which he casts 
those  who  do  not  follow  him.  He  has  even  made  one  of  his  mount’s  ears  into  a 
paradise and the other one into a hell; his body is of such-and-such vast dimensions;”9 
they describe him like this? 

T h e  A n s w e r : The Dajjal superficially resembles a human being. But he is 
arrogant and pharaoh-like and has forgotten God, so is a foolish satan and intriguing 
man  who  calls  his  superficial,  tyrannical  rule  godhead.  But  his  atheistic  movement, 
his collective personality, is truly vast. The awesome descriptions of the Dajjal in the 
narrations allude to that.10 At one time, the commander-in-chief of the Japanese army 
was depicted with one foot in the Pacific Ocean and the other ten days’ distance away 
in  Port  Arthur.  The  collective  personality  of  the  commander-in-chief’s  army  was 
illustrated by depicting him in that way. 

The Dajjal’s false paradise consists of the alluring amusements and enticements 
of  civilization.  His  mount  is  means  of  transport  like  the  railway;  at  one  end  of  the 
train is the fire-box which sometimes sprays fire on those who do not follow him. The 
other of the mount’s ears, that is, the other end of it, has been furnished like Paradise, 
where  he  seats  his  followers.  Anyway,  the  railway,  an  important  mount  of  sinful, 
cruel civilization, brings a false paradise for the dissolute and the worldly, while  for 
the people of religion and Islam like the angels of Hell it brings dangers in the hand of 
civilization, and casts them into captivity and indigence. 

For sure, when the true religion of Christianity emerges and is transformed into 

Islam, it will spread its light to the great majority of people in  

                                                 
9 Bukhari, Anbiya’, 3; Muslim, Fitan, 109; Musnad, iii, 376; Ibn Abi Shayba, al-Musannaf, viii, 655. 
10 See, Bukhari, Anbiya’, 3; Muslim, Fitan, 100-5; Abu Da’ud, Fitan, 1; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 55-61. 

 

77

the  world,  but  when  the  end  of  the  world  approaches,  an  atheistic  movement  will 
again  appear  and  become  dominant.  According  to  the  rule,  “The  word  is  with  the 
majority,”  no  one  will  remain  on  earth who  says,  “Allah!  Allah!;”11  that  is,  “Allah! 
Allah!” will  not be uttered by any significant group that holds an  important position 
on the earth. The people of truth will form a minority or will be defeated, but they will 
remain permanently till the end of the world. Only, the moment Doomsday occurs, as 
a token of divine mercy, the spirits of the believers will be seized first so that they do 
not see the terrors of the Last Day, and it will break forth over the unbelievers.12 

THE GIST OF YOUR FIFTH QUESTION 

Will the immortal spirits be grieved at the events of the Last Day? 
T h e  A n s w e r : They will be grieved according to their degrees. They will be 
grieved  in  the  same  way  that  they  are  grieved  at  the  overwhelming,  wrathful 
manifestations of the angels towards themselves. A person is affected in his mind and 
conscience  if others  are  trembling  in  the  snow  and  cold outside while  he  himself  is 
inside  in  the  warmth.  Similarly,  since  they  are  connected  to  the  universe  immortal 
spirits  are  affected  according  to  their  degree  by  its  awesome  events.  The  Qur’an 
indicates and alludes to this and to the tormented being grievously afflicted, and those 
destined  for  happiness  being  struck  by  wonder  and  amazement,  and  even  rejoicing. 
For the All-Wise Qur’an always mentions the extraordinary events of the resurrection 
in the form of threats;  it  says: “You will  see it!”  Whereas those who will  witness it 
physically are those living at the Last Day. That is to say, spirits whose bodies have 
rotted in their graves are also addressed by those Qur’anic threats. 

THE GIST OF YOUR SIXTH QUESTION  

Does the verse,  

Everything will perish save His countenance(28:88) 

include the hereafter, Paradise, and Hell, and their inhabitants, or does it not include 
them? 

T h e  A n s w e r : This question has been much discussed by the scholars, the 
saints,  and  those  who  uncover  the  realities  of  creation.  They  have  the  say  in  this 
matter. Moreover, the verse is very broad and contains many  

                                                 
11 Muslim, Iman, 234; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 35; Musnad, iii, 107. 
12 See, Ibn Hajar, al-Matalib al-‘Aliya, iv, 353; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 9. 

 

78

levels.  The  majority  of  scholars  said  that  it  does  not  include  the  everlasting  realm, 
while  others  suggested  that  those  realms  too  will  perish  for  just  an  instant,  a  brief 
interval  of  time,  but  so  briefly  that  their  being  annihilated  and  restored  will  be 
imperceptible.  However,  the  absolute  annihilation  stated  by  some  of  those  who 
uncover  the  realities  whose  ideas  are  extreme,  is  not  right.  For since  the  Most  Pure 
and Holy Divine Essence is eternal and everlasting, His attributes and names are also 
surely eternal and everlasting. And since His attributes and names are everlasting and 
eternal,  the  immortal  beings  in  the  realm  of  eternity,  which  are  the  mirrors, 
manifestations,  impresses,  and  places  of  reflection  of  His  attributes  and  names,  of 
necessity will not vanish into absolute non-existence. 

A couple of points have occurred to me from the effulgence of the Qur’an, and I 

shall write them here in summary: 

The  First:  Almighty  God  is  the  possessor  of  such  absolute  power  that  He  can 
bring existence into being and despatch it to non-existence most easily, as though they 
were two houses in relation to His power and will. If He wishes He can do this in a 
day or in an instant. Anyway there is no absolute non-existence, for His knowledge is 
all-embracing;  there  is  nothing  outside  the  sphere  of  divine  knowledge  so  that 
something can be cast there. The non-existence within the sphere of His knowledge is 
external  non-existence  and  a  title  for  something  concealed  but  existent  in  divine 
knowledge. Some scholars have called the beings existent in divine knowledge “latent 
realities.” In which case, to go to extinction is to be temporarily divested of external 
dress and to enter upon existence in divine knowledge, existence in meaning. That is 
to  say,  transitory,  ephemeral  beings  leave  external  existence  and  their  essences  are 
clothed  in  what  has  the  meaning  of  existence;  they  pass  from  the  sphere  of  divine 
power to that of divine knowledge. 

The  Second:  As  we  have  explained  in  many  of  the  Words,  in  regard  to  their 
faces which look to themselves, all things are nothing. They do not possess existences 
that are of themselves independent or constant, and they do not possess realities that 
subsist of themselves. But in regard to their aspects that look to Almighty God, that is, 
that signify a meaning other than themselves, they are not nothing. For in that aspect 
are to be seen the manifestations of eternal names. That aspect is not doomed for non-
existence, for it bears the shadow of an eternal existent. It has a reality, it is constant, 
and  it  is  elevated.  For  it  is  a  sort  of  constant  shadow  of  the  eternal  name  which  it 
manifests. 

Furthermore,  “Everything  will  perish  save  His  countenance”  is  a  sword  to  cut 

man’s attachment to things other than God. It looks to the transitory  

 

79

things  of  this  fleeting  world  in  order  to  sever  attachment  to  them,  if  it  is  not  for 
Almighty  God’s sake.  That  is  to  say,  if man’s  attachment  is  for  God’s  sake  and  on 
account of the face that looks to Him, and for Him, he cannot embrace what is other 
than Him so that his head should be cut off with the sword of “Everything will perish 
save His countenance.” 

In Short: If a person looks at things for God, if a person finds God, nothing will 
be other than Him so that his head should be severed. But if he does not find God and 
does not look on his account, everything will be other than Him. A person has to use 
the sword of “Everything will perish save His countenance;” he has to rend the veil so 
that he can find Him. 

                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

 

80

The Sixteenth Letter 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Men said to them: “A great army is gathering against you,” and frightened 
them.  But  it  [only]  increased  their  belief;  they  said:  “For  us  God  suffices, 
and He is the best Disposer of Affairs.”(3:173) 

This 

letter  manifested 

to  him 
mildly,”(20:44) and was not written vehemently. It is the answer to a question asked 
me explicitly and implicitly by many people. 

the  verse,  “But  speak 

the  meaning  of 

[To reply is not agreeable to me and I do not want to, for I have bound 
everything to reliance on God. But since I have not been left in peace to 
myself in my own world and since they have turned my attention towards the 
world, I am compelled to propound five points in the language of the Old Said 
in order to explain the reality of the situation both to my friends, and to the 
worldly,1 and to those in authority, so as to save not myself, but my friends 
and my Words, from the suspicions and ill-treatment of the worldly.] 

FIRST POINT 

with them?” 

I am asked: “Why have you withdrawn from politics and now have nothing to do 

T h e  A n s w e r : The Old Said of nine or ten years ago was involved in politics 
to  a  degree;  indeed,  thinking  he  would  serve  religion  and  learning  by  means  of 
politics,  he  was  wearied  for  nothing.  He  saw  that  it  is  a  dangerous  way  which  is 
dubious and full of difficulties, and for me superfluous as well as forming an obstacle 
to  the  most  necessary  duties.  It  is  mostly  lies  and  may  be  exploited  by  foreigners 
without one being aware of it. Furthermore, a person who enters politics either wins 
or is in opposition. As for  

                                                 
11 For ‘the worldly,’ see, p.  fn. 

 

81

winning, since I am neither an official nor a deputy, to work in politics is unnecessary 
and  nonsense  for  me.  Politics  has  no  need  for  me  that  I  should  meddle  in them  for 
nothing. If I join the opposition, I would do so either with ideas or with force. If it was 
with ideas there is no need for me, for the questions are all clear and everyone knows 
them  as  I  do.  To  wag  one’s  chin  for  nothing  is  pointless.  If  I  join  the  opposition 
intending to use force and to provoke an incident, I might commit thousands of sins to 
reach one doubtful goal. Numerous people would be struck by disaster on account of 
one. So saying that in all conscience he could not commit sins and cause the innocent 
to  commit  them  for  a  one  or  two  in  ten  possibility,  the  Old  Said  gave up  cigarettes 
together  with  the  newspapers,  politics,  and  worldly  conversation  about  politics. 
Decisive  evidence  for  this  is  the  fact  that  for the  past  eight  years  I  have  not read  a 
single newspaper nor listened to one being read. Let someone come forward and say 
that I have read one or listened to one. Whereas eight years ago the Old Said used to 
read perhaps eight newspapers every day. Furthermore, for the past five  years I have 
been  under  the  closest  scrutiny  and  surveillance.  Anyone  who  has  observed  the 
slightest hint of political activity should say so. For someone like me who is nervous, 
fearless,  and  without  attachment,  who  considers  the  best  stratagem  to  be  without 
stratagem, his ideas will not remain secret for eight days, let alone eight  years. If he 
had  had  any  appetite  or  desire  for  politics,  there  would  have  been  no  need  for 
investigation and scrutiny, for he would have given voice like the firing of a cannon. 

SECOND POINT 

Why does the New Said avoid politics with such vehemence? 
T h e  A n s w e r : He avoids it so vehemently in order to serve belief and the 
Qur’an,  which  is  of  the  greatest  importance,  the  greatest  necessity  and  is  most  pure 
and most right, and so as not to sacrifice unnecessarily and officiously for one or two 
doubtful  years  of  worldly  life  the  work  of  gaining  more  than  millions  of  years  of 
eternal life. For he says: I am growing old and I do not know how much longer I shall 
live,  so for  me  the  most  important  question  should  be  working  for  eternal  life.  The 
prime  means  of  gaining  eternal  life  and  the  key  to  everlasting  happiness  is  belief 
(êma\n),  so  I  have  to  work  for  that.  But  since  I  am  obliged  by  the  Shari‘a  to  serve 
people in respect of learning so that they may profit too, I want to perform that duty. 
However, such service will either concern social and worldly life, which I cannot do, 
and also in stormy times it is not possible to perform such service soundly. I therefore 
gave  up  that  side  of  it  and  chose  the  side  of  serving  belief,  which  is  the  most 
important, the most necessary, and the soundest. I  

 

82

leave  that  door  open  so  that  the  truths  of  belief  I  have  gained  for  myself  and  the 
spiritual  remedies  I  have  myself  experienced  may  be  acquired  by  others.  Perhaps 
Almighty  God  will  accept  this  service  and  make  it  atonement  for  my  former  sins. 
Apart from Satan the Accursed, no one, be it a believer or an unbeliever, one of the 
veracious  or  an  atheist,  has  the  right  to  oppose  this  work.  For  unbelief  resembles 
nothing  else.  In  tyrannizing,  vice,  and  grievous  sins  there  may  be  an  inauspicious 
diabolical pleasure, but in unbelief there is  no sort of pleasure at all. It  is pain upon 
pain, darkness upon darkness, torment upon torment. 

Just how contrary to reason it would be for someone like me who is unattached, 
alone,  and  compelled  to  atone  for  his  former  sins  to  leave  aside  working  for  an 
endless eternal life and serving a sacred light like belief, and to cast himself in old age 
into the unnecessary, perilous games of politics – just  how contrary to wisdom, just 
what a lunacy it would be even lunatics would understand! 

But if you ask why service of the Qur’an and belief prohibit me, I would say this: 
the  truths  of  belief  and  the  Qur’an  are  each  like  diamonds.  If  I  were  polluted  by 
politics,  the  ordinary  people  who  are  easily  deceived,  would  wonder  about  those 
diamonds  I  was  holding:  “Aren’t  they  for  political  propaganda,  to  attract  more 
supporters?”  They  might  regard  the  diamonds  as  bits  of  common  glass.  Then,  by 
being involved with politics I would be wronging the diamonds by as though reducing 
their value. O you whose view is restricted to this world! Why do you struggle against 
me? Why do you not leave me to myself? 

If you say: The shaikhs sometimes interfere in our business, and they sometimes 

call you a shaikh. 

I reply: Good sirs! I am not a shaikh, I am a hoja (teacher). The evidence is this: 
I  have  been  here  four  years  and  if  I  had  taught  a  single  person  the  Sufi  way,  you 
would have had the right to be suspicious. But I have told everyone who has come to 
me: Belief is necessary, Islam is necessary; this is not the age of Sufism. 

If you say: They call you Said-i Kurdi; perhaps you have some nationalist ideas 

and that doesn’t suit our interests. 

I would reply: Sirs! The things the Old Said and the New Said have written are 
clear. I cite as testimony the certain statement, “Islam has abrogated the tribalism of 
Ignorance.”2 For years I have considered negative  

                                                 
2 See, Bukhari, Ahkam, 4; ‘Imara, 36, 37; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 5; Tirmidhi, Jihad, 28; ‘Ilm, 16; Nasa’i, 
Bay’a, 26; Ibn Maja, Jihad, 39; Musnad, iv, 69, 70, 199, 204, 205; v, 381; vi, 402, 403. 

 

83

nationalism  and  racialism  to  be  fatal  poisons,  since  they  are  a  variety  of  European 
disease. And Europe has infected Islam with it thinking it would cause division, and 
Islam  would  break up  and  be  easily  swallowed.  My  students  and  those  people  who 
have had anything to do with me know that for years I have tried to treat that disease. 
Since  it  is  thus,  good  sirs,  why  you  make  every  incident  a  pretext  to  harass  me? 
According  to  what  principle  do  you  cause  me  distress  at  every  worldly  incident, 
which  is  like punishing  and  inflicting  trouble on  a  soldier  in  the  West  because  of  a 
mistake  made  by  a  soldier  in  the  East  because  they  both  belong  to  the  army,  or 
convicting a shopkeeper in Baghdad because of a crime committed by a tradesman in 
Istanbul  due  to  their  being  in  the  same  line  of  business?  Who  could  do  this  in  all 
conscience? What advantage is there that could require it? 

THIRD POINT 

My friends who wonder how I am and are astonished at my meeting in patience 
every  calamity,  silently  ask  the  following  question:  “How  can  you  endure  the 
difficulties  you’re  faced  with,  when  formerly  you  were  very  proud  and  angry  and 
could not endure even the least insult?” 

T h e  A n s w e r : Listen to two short stories about two incidents and you will 

receive your answer: 

The First Story: Two years ago an official spoke insultingly and contemptuously 
about  me  behind  my  back.  They  told  me  about  it  later.  A  vein  of  temperament 
remaining  from  the  Old  Said  made  me  feel  upset  about  it  for  about  an  hour.  Then 
through Almighty God’s mercy the following occurred to me; it dispelled the distress 
and made me forgive the man. It was this: 

I addressed my soul saying:  if  his  insults  and the faults  he described concerned 
my person, may God be pleased with him, because he recalled the faults of my soul. If 
he  spoke  the  truth,  he  prompted  me  to  train  my  soul  and  helped  to  save  me  from 
arrogance. If he spoke falsely, he helped to save me from hypocrisy and undeserved 
fame, the source of hypocrisy. No, I am not reconciled with my  soul, for I have  not 
trained it. If someone tells me there is a scorpion on my neck or breast or else points it 
out  to  me,  I  should  be  grateful  to  him,  not  offended.  But  if  the  man’s  insults  were 
directed at my belief and my being a servant of the Qur’an, it does not concern me. I 
refer him to the Qur’an’s Owner, who employs me. He is mighty, He is wise. And if it 
was merely to curse at me, insult me, and blacken my character, that does not concern 
me either. For I am an exile, a prisoner, a stranger, and my hands are tied; it does not 
fall  to  me  to  try  to  restore  my  honour  myself.  To  do  so  is  the  business  of  the 
authorities of this village where I am a guest and  

 

84

under  surveillance,  then  of  the  district,  then  of  the  province.  Insulting  a  person’s 
prisoner concerns the person; he defends the prisoner. Since that was the reality of the 
matter, my heart became easy. I declared: “My [own] affair I commit to God; for God 
[ever]  watches  over  His  servants.”(40:44)  I  thought  of  the  incident  as  not  having 
happened. But unfortunately it was later understood that the Qur’an had not forgiven 
the man. 

The Second Story: This  year I heard that an  incident had occurred. Although  I 
only  heard a brief account of it after it  had happened, I was treated as though  I  had 
been closely connected with it. Anyway I hardly correspond with anyone, and if I do, 
I only write extremely rarely to a friend concerning some question of belief. In fact I 
have written only one letter to my brother in four years. Both I prevent myself from 
mixing with others, and the worldly prevent me. I have only been able to meet with 
one or two close friends once or twice a week. As for visitors to the village, once or 
twice  a  month  perhaps  one  or  two  used  to  meet  with  me  for  one  or  two  minutes 
concerning  some matter to do with the  hereafter. In exile, a stranger, alone, with  no 
one, I was barred from everything, from everyone, in a village that was unsuitable for 
someone  like  me  to  work  for  a  livelihood.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  four  years  ago  I 
repaired  a  tumble-down  mosque.  Although  with  the  certificate  I  had  from  my  own 
region  to  act  an  imam  and  preacher,  I  acted  as  imam  in  the  mosque  for  four  years 
(May God accept it), this past Ramadan I could not go there. Sometimes I performed 
the five daily prayers alone. I was deprived of the twenty-fivefold merit of performing 
the prayers in congregation. 

I  showed  the  same  patience  and  forbearance  in  the  face  of  these  two  incidents 
that  befell  me  as  I  did  in  the  face  of  that  official’s  treatment  two  years  ago.  God 
willing I shall continue to do so. I think like this, and say: if this ill-treatment, distress, 
and  oppression  inflicted  on  me  by  the  worldly  is  for  my  faulty  soul,  I  forgive  it. 
Perhaps my soul will be reformed by means of it, and perhaps it will be atonement for 
its  sins.  I  have  experienced  many  good  things  in  this  guest-house  of the  world;  if  I 
experience a little of its trials, I shall still offer thanks. But if the worldly oppress me 
because of my service of belief and the Qur’an, it is not up to me to defend it. I refer it 
to the Mighty and Compelling One. If their intention is to destroy the regard in which 
I am  held generally,  to  expunge  my  undeserved  fame,  which  is  baseless  and  causes 
hypocrisy and destroys sincerity, may God bless them! For to be held in high regard 
by  people  generally  and  gain  a  name  among  them  is  harmful  for  people  like  me. 
Those who have dealings with me know that I do not want respect to be shown to me, 
indeed,  I  can’t  abide  it.  I have  even  scolded  a  valuable  friend  of  mine  perhaps  fifty 
times for show 

 

85

ing me excessive respect. If their intention in slandering me, belittling me in the eyes 
of  the  people,  and  defaming  me  is  aimed  at  the  truths  of  belief  and  the  Qur’an  of 
which I am the interpreter, it is pointless. For a veil cannot be drawn over the stars of 
the Qur’an. A person who closes his eyes only himself does not see; he does not make 
it night for anyone else. 

FOURTH POINT 

The answer to a number of suspicious questions: 
T h e  F i r s t : The worldly say to me: “How do you live? What do you live on 
since you do not work? We don’t want people in our country who sit around idly and 
live off the labour of others.” 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e r  :  I  live through  frugality  and  the resulting  plenty.  I am  not 
obliged  to  anyone  other  than  the  One  who  Provides  for  me  and  I  have  taken  the 
decision  not  to  become  indebted  to  anyone  else.  Yes,  someone  who  lives  on  a 
hundred para, or even forty para, does not become indebted to anyone. I do not want 
to explain this matter. To do so is most disagreeable to me, as it may make me feel a 
sort  of  pride  or  egotism.  But  since  the  worldly  ask  about  it  suspiciously,  I  reply  as 
follows:  since  my  childhood,  throughout  my  life,  it  has  been  one  of  my  guiding 
principles not to accept anything from people, even zakat, and not to accept a salary – 
only  I  was  compelled  to  accept  one  for  one  or  two  years  in  the  Darü’l-Hikmeti’l-
Islamiye on the insistence of my friends – and not to become obliged to people for a 
worldly livelihood. The people of my native region and those who have known me in 
other  places  know  this.  During  these  five  years  of  exile,  many  friends  have  tried 
earnestly to make me accept their gifts, but I have accepted none of them. And so, if it 
is  asked  me,  “So  how  do  you  manage  to  live?”,  I  reply:  “I  live  through  divine 
bestowal and blessings.” For sure, my soul deserves every sort of insult and contempt, 
but the plenty and blessings, a divine bestowal, I receive as sustenance are a wonder 
resulting from service of the Qur’an. In accordance with the verse,  

But the bounty of your Sustainer rehearse and proclaim,(93:11)  

I shall cite the bounties Almighty God has bestowed on me, and give a few examples 
by  way  of  thanks.  To  do  so  is  thanks,  but  I  am  still  frightened  that  it  will  induce 
hypocrisy and pride, and that blessed plenty will be cut. For to make known a secret 
divine gift of plenty causes it to cease. But what can I do? I have to describe them. 

The First: This six months one bushel (kile)3 of wheat, consisting of  

                                                 
3 36.5 lbs. (Tr.) 

 

86

thirty-six loaves of bread, has sufficed me. There is still some left, it is not finished. 
How much longer4 it will last, I do not know.  

The  Second:  This  blessed  month  of  Ramadan  I  was  given  food  by  only  two 
houses, and both of them made me ill. I understood that I am prohibited from eating 
other people’s  food.  The  rest of  the  time,  in  the  whole  of  Ramadan,  three  loaves  of 
bread  and  one  okka5  of  rice  were  enough  for  me,  as  was  witnessed  and  told  by 
Abdullah  Çavuş,  the  owner  of  a  blessed  house  and  a  loyal  friend  who  saw  my 
economizing. In fact, the rice was finished two weeks after the end of Ramadan.  

The Third: For three months on the mountain one  kıyye6 of butter was enough 
for me and my guests, eating it every day together with bread. On one occasion even I 
had a blessed visitor called Süleyman. Both his bread and my bread were about to be 
finished.  It  was  Wednesday.  I  told  him  to  go  and  get  some  more.  For  two  hours’ 
distance on every side of us there was no one from whom he could have got any. He 
said  that  he  wanted  to  stay  with  me  on  the  mountain  on  Thursday  night  so  that  we 
could pray together. I declared: “Our reliance is on God,” and told him to stay. Later, 
although it had no connection with this and there was no reason for it, we both began 
walking till we reached the top of the mountain. There was a little water in the ewer, 
and  we  had  a  small  piece  of  sugar and  some  tea.  I  told  him:  “Brother!  Make  some 
tea!”  He  set  about  making  it  and  I  sat  down  under  a  cedar-tree  overlooking  a  deep 
ravine. I thought regretfully to myself: we have a bit of mouldy bread which will only 
just be enough for us this evening. What shall we do for two days and what shall I say 
to this ingenuous man? While thinking this, I suddenly turned my head involuntarily 
and I saw a huge loaf of bread on the cedar-tree in among the branches; it was facing 
us. I exclaimed: “Süleyman! Good news! Almighty God has sent us food.” We took 
the bread, and looking at  it saw that  no bird or wild animal  had touched it. And for 
twenty or thirty days no one at all had climbed to the top of that mountain. The bread 
was sufficient for us for the two days. While we  were eating and it was about to be 
finished,  righteous  Süleyman  who had  been  the  most  loyal of  loyal  friends  for  four 
years, suddenly appeared from below with more bread. 

The Fourth: I bought this sack coat I’m wearing seven  years ago second-hand. 
In  five  years  I  have  spent only  four and a half liras on clothes, underwear, slippers, 
and stockings. Frugality and divine mercy and the resulting plenty have sufficed me. 

                                                 
4 It lasted a year. 
5 About 2.8 lbs. or 1,300 grammes.   
6 About 2.8 lbs. 

 

87

There  are  many  other  things  like  these  examples  and  numerous  sorts  of  divine 
blessings.  The  people  of  this  village  know  most  of  them.  But  do  not  suppose  I  am 
mentioning  them  out  of  pride,  I  have  been  forced  to,  rather.  And  do  not  think  they 
were  due  to  my  goodness.  These  instances  of  plenty  were  either  bestowal  to  the 
sincere  friends  who  have  visited  me,  or  a  bestowal  on  account  of  service  of  the 
Qur’an,  or  an  abundance  and  benefit  resulting  from  frugality,  or  they  have  been 
sustenance  for  the  four  cats  I  have  which  recite  the  divine  names  “O  Most 
Compassionate  One!  O  Most  Compassionate  One!”,  which  comes  in  the  form  of 
plenty and from which I benefit too. 

Yes, if you listen carefully to their mournful miaowings, you will understand that 
they  are  saying,  “O  Most  Compassionate  One!  O  Most  Compassionate  One!”  We 
have arrived at the subject of cats and it has recalled the hen. I have a hen. This winter 
every  day  almost  without  exception  she  brought  me  an  egg  from  the  treasury  of 
mercy.  Then  one  day  she  brought  me  two  eggs  and  I  was  astonished.  I  asked  my 
friends “How can this be?” They replied: “Perhaps it  is  a divine  gift.” The  hen also 
has  a  young  chick  she  hatched  in  the  summer.  It  started  to  lay  at  the  beginning  of 
Ramadan  and  continued  for  forty  days.  Neither  I  nor  those who  assist  me  have  any 
doubt  that,  both  its  being  a  pullet,  and  the  season  being  winter,  and  Ramadan,  this 
blessed  situation  was  a  divine  gift  and  bestowal.  And  whenever the  mother  stopped 
laying, it immediately started, never leaving me without eggs. 

 S e c o n d  S u s p i c i o u s  Q u e s t i o n : The worldly ask: How can we be 
sure you won’t meddle in our world? If we set you free, you may interfere in it. Also, 
how  do  we  know  that  you  aren’t  being  cunning?  How  do  we  know  that  it  isn’t  a 
stratagem, pretending to have abandoned the world and taking things from the people 
not openly, but secretly? 

T h e  A n s w e r : My attitude in the Court Martial and in the period before the 
proclamation of the Constitution, which are known by many, and my defence  in the 
Court Martial at that time called The Testimony of Two Schools of Misfortune, show 
decisively that the life I lived was such that I would not resort to the tiniest wiles, let 
alone cunning and subterfuge. If I had resorted to trickery this last five years, I would 
have made application to you in sycophantic manner. A wily man tries to ingratiate 
himself. He does not hold back; he always tries to deceive and hoodwink. Whereas I 
have  not  condescended  to  respond  to  the  severest  attacks  and  criticisms  levelled  at 
me. Saying, “I place my trust in God,” I turned my back on the worldly. Moreover, if 
he  is  sensible,  a  person  who  discovers  the  reality  of  this  world  and  knows  the 
hereafter, is not sorry; he does not turn back to  

 

88

the  world  and  struggle  with  it  again.  After  the  age  of  fifty,  a  person  who  has  no 
connection  with  anything  and  is  alone,  will  not  sacrifice  eternal  life  for  one  or  two 
years  of  the  chatter  and  deception  of  this  world.  If  he  does,  he  is  not  cunning  but 
foolish and crazy. What can a crazy lunatic do so that anyone should bother with him? 
As for suspecting me of outwardly abandoning the world while inwardly seeking it, in 
accordance with the verse, 

Nor do I absolve my own self [of blame]; the [human] soul is certainly prone 
to evil,(12:53) 

I do not exonerate my soul, for it wants everything bad. But in this fleeting world, this 
temporary  guest-house, during old age, in a brief life, it is  not reasonable to destroy 
eternal  life  and  everlasting  happiness  for  a  little  bit  of  pleasure.  Since  it  is  not 
profitable for the reasonable and the aware, willy-nilly my soul has had to follow my 
reason. 

T h e  T h i r d  S u s p i c i o u s  Q u e s t i o n : The worldly say: Do you like 
us?  Do  you  approve  of  us?  If  you  do  like  us,  why  are  you  stand-offish  and  have 
nothing to do with us? If you don’t like us, that means you object to us and we crush 
those who object to us. 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  Not  you,  if  I  had  loved  your  world,  I  would  not  have 
withdrawn  from  it.  I  don’t  like  either  you  or  your  world,  but  I  don’t  interfere  with 
them.  For I  have  different  goals;  my  heart  is  filled  with  different  things,  leaving  no 
room for anything else. Your duty is to look to a person’s hand, not to his heart. For 
you  seek  your  government  and  your  public  order.  So  long  as  his  hand  does  not 
interfere,  what  right  do  you  have  to  interfere  in  his  heart  and  tell  him,  “your  heart 
should love us too,” although you are in no way worthy of it? Yes, just as I desire the 
spring during this winter and long for it but cannot will  it or make it come; so too I 
long  for  the  world  to  be  righted  and  I  pray  for  it  and  I  want  the  worldly  to  be 
reformed,  but  I  cannot  will  these  things  because  I  do  not  have  the  power.  I  cannot 
bring them about, because it is neither my duty, nor do I have the capacity. 

F  o  u  r  t  h    S  u  s  p  i  c  i  o  u  s    Q  u  e  s  t  i  o  n  :  The  worldly  say:  we  have 
experienced so many calamities, we  no longer have confidence in anyone.  How can 
we be certain that given the opportunity you won’t interfere like you want to? 

T h e  A n s w e r : The previous points should assure you. In addition, I did not 
interfere  in  your  world  while  in  my  native  region  among  my  students  and  relatives, 
with  those  who  heeded  me  in  the  midst  of  volatile  events.  So  for  someone  who  is 
alone  in exile, with  no one, a stranger, weak, powerless, turned with all  his strength 
towards the hereafter, cut off from all  

 

89

social relations and communication, who has found only a few friends from far afield 
who  also  look  to  the  hereafter,  and  who  is  a  stranger  to  everyone  else  and  whom 
everyone else regards as a stranger – for such a person to interfere  in  your fruitless, 
dangerous world would surely be compounded lunacy. 

FIFTH POINT 

This concerns five small matters. 
T h e  F i r s t :  The worldly ask me: Why don’t you practise the principles of 
our  civilization,  our  style  of  life,  and  our  manner  of  dressing?  Does  this  mean  you 
oppose us? 

M y  r e p l y : Sirs! What right do you have to propose to me the principles of 
your civilization? For as though casting me outside the laws of civilization, you have 
wrongfully  forced  me  to  reside  in  a  village  for  five  years  and  prohibited  me  from 
having any social relations or communication. You left all the exiles in the town with 
their friends and relatives, then  gave them the papers granting them an amnesty, but 
without reason you isolated me and did not allow me to meet with anyone from my 
native region, except for one or two. That means you do not count me as a member of 
this nation or a citizen. How can you propose that I apply your civil code to myself? 
You have turned  the world into a prison for me. Such things cannot be proposed to 
someone in prison. You closed the door of the world on me, so I knocked on the door 
of the hereafter and divine mercy opened it to me. How can the confused customs and 
principles of the world be dictated to someone at the door of the hereafter? Whenever 
you set me free and return me to my native region and restore my rights, then you can 
require me to conform to your principles. 

S e c o n d  M a t t e r  : The worldly say: “We have an official department for 
instructing  in the precepts of religion and truths  of Islam. On what authority do  you 
publish religious works? Since you are a convicted exile, you have no right to meddle 
in these matters.” 

T h e  A n s w e r : Truth and reality cannot be restricted. How can belief and the 
Qur’an be restricted? You can restrict the principles and laws of your world, but the 
truths  of  belief  and  Qur’anic  principles  cannot  be  forced  into  the  form  of  worldly 
dealings or be given an official guise in return for a wage. Those mysteries, which are 
divine gifts, those blessings, come rather through a sincere intention and giving up the 
world and carnal pleasures. Moreover, that official department of yours accepted me 
and  appointed  me  as  a  preacher  while  I  was  in  my  home  region.  I  accepted  the 
position, but rejected the salary. I have the document in my possession. With it I can 
act  

 

90

as  an  imam  and  preacher  everywhere,  because  my  being  exiled  was  unjust.  Also, 
since the exiles have been returned, my old documents are still valid. 

Secondly: I addressed the truths of belief I have written directly at my own soul. 
I do  not invite  everyone.  Rather,  those  whose  spirits are  needy  and  hearts  wounded 
search  out  and  find  those  Qur’anic  remedies.  Only,  to  secure  my  livelihood  I  had 
printed a treatise of mine about the resurrection of the dead before the new script was 
introduced. And the former governor, who was unfair to me, studied the treatise, but 
did nothing against it since he could find nothing in it to criticize. 

T  h  i  r  d    M  a  t  t  e  r  :  Some  of  my  friends  remain  apparently  aloof  from  me 
because the worldly look on me with suspicion and in order to curry favour with the 
worldly,  indeed, they  criticize  me.  But  the  cunning  worldly  attribute  their  aloofness 
and avoiding me not to their loyalty to the worldly but to a sort of hypocrisy and lack 
of conscience, and they look on those friends of mine coldly. 

So I say this: O my friends of the hereafter! Don’t hold back from me as a servant 
of  the  Qur’an  and  run  away.  God  willing,  no  harm  will  come  to  you  from  me. 
Suppose some calamity is visited on you or I am oppressed, you still cannot be saved 
by  avoiding  me.  By  doing  that  you  will  make  yourselves  more  deserving  of  being 
visited by a calamity and receiving a blow. And what  is there, that  you should have 
these groundless fears? 

F o u r t h  M a t t e r :  I see during this time of exile that certain boastful people 
who  have  fallen  into  the  swamp  of  politics  regard  me  in  a  partisan  manner,  with 
rivalry, as though I were connected with the worldly movements like they are. 

Sirs! I am in the current of belief. Before me is the current of unbelief. I have no 
connection with other currents or movements. Perhaps some of those who work for a 
wage consider themselves excused to a degree. But to assume a stance opposing me in 
rivalry  in  the  name  of  patriotism  for  no  wage,  and  to  harass  me  and  oppress  me,  is 
truly  a  grievous  error.  For  as  was  proved  above,  I  have  no  connection  at  all  with 
world politics. I have dedicated all my time and my life to the truths of belief and the 
Qur’an.  Since  it  is  thus,  the  person  who  torments  and  harasses  me  in  rivalry  should 
realize that to do so is like harming belief in the name of atheism and unbelief. 

F i f t h  M a t t e r :  Since this world is transitory, and life is short, and one’s 
essential duties are many, and eternal life is gained here; and since this guest-house of 
the world is not without an owner, indeed, has a most wise and generous director, and 
neither  good  nor  bad  will  remain  without  recompense;  and  since  according  to  the 
verse,  

 

91

On no soul does God place a burden greater than it can bear(2:286)  

there is no obligation that is insupportable, and a safe way is preferable to a harmful 
one,  and  since  friends  and  ranks  last  only  till  the  door of  the  grave;  then  surely  the 
most  fortunate  person  is  he  who  does  not  forget  the  hereafter  for  this  world,  nor 
sacrifice the hereafter for this world, nor destroy the life of the hereafter for worldly 
life, nor waste his life on trivial things, but considers himself to be a guest and acts in 
accordance  with  the  commands  of  the guest-house’s  Owner,  then  opens  the  door of 
the grave in confidence and enters upon eternal happiness.7 

                                                 
7 The reason for these ‘sinces’ is this: I take no notice of the wrongs and tyranny perpetrated against 
my person and give them no importance. I say, “They are not worth worrying about,” and I do not 
interfere in the world. 

 

92

An Addendum 
to the Sixteenth Letter 

In His Name! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

Without  reason  the  worldly  became  suspicious  of  a  powerless  stranger  like 
myself,  and  imagining  me  to  have  the  power of  thousands,  put  me under  numerous 
restrictions.  They  did  not  give  permission  for  me  to  stay  a  night  or  two  in  Bedre,  a 
district  of  Barla,  or  on  one  of  the  mountains  of  Barla.  I  heard  that  they  say:  “Said 
possesses the power of fifty thousand soldiers, so we can’t set him free.” 

So I say: You unhappy people whose  view  is restricted to this world! How is it 
that  you  do  not  know  the  matters  of  the  world, despite  working  for  it  with  all  your 
strength,  and  govern  it  like  lunatics?  If  it  is  my  person  you  fear,    one  soldier  even 
could  do  more  than  me,  let  alone  fifty  thousand.  That  is,  he  could  be  posted  at  the 
door of my room and tell me: “You can’t go out!” 

But  if  it  is  my  profession  and  my  being  herald  of  the  Qur’an  and  the  moral 
strength of belief that you fear, then you are wrong; you should be aware that in that 
respect,  I  have  the  strength  of fifty  million  soldiers,  not  fifty  thousand!  For  through 
the strength of the All-Wise Qur’an, I challenge all Europe including your irreligious 
people. Through the lights of belief I have published I have razed the sturdy bastions 
they call the physical sciences and nature. I have cast down lower than animals their 
greatest  irreligious  philosophers.  If  all  Europe  were  to  gather,  of  which  your 
irreligious people are a part, through God’s assistance, they could not make me recant 
a single matter of that way of mine. God willing, they could not defeat me! 

Since the matter is thus, I do not interfere in your world, so don’t you interfere in 

my hereafter! If you do, if it will be of no avail. 

What is determined by God cannot be turned by force; 
A flame that if lit by God, cannot be extinguished by puffing. 

The  worldly  are  exceptionally  and  excessively  suspicious  of  me;  quite  simply, 
they  are  frightened of  me.  Imagining  about  me  non-existent  things  that  even  if  they 
did exist would not constitute a political crime and could  

 

93

not be the cause of accusation, like being a shaikh, or having high rank or belonging 
to  a  powerful  family,  or  being  a  tribal  leader  and  influential  and  having  numerous 
followers,  or  meeting  with  people  from  my  native  region,  or  being  involved  in  the 
affairs of the world, or even entering politics or the opposition; imagining such things 
about  me,  they  have  been  carried  away  by  groundless  fears.  At  a  time  they  are 
discussing pardoning those in prison and outside, that is, those that according to them 
cannot  be  pardoned, they  have  quite  simply  barred  me  from  everything.  A  bad  and 
ephemeral person wrote the following good and enduring words: 

If tyranny has cannon, shot, and forts, 
Right has an untwistable arm, a constant face. 

And I say: 

If the worldly have rule, power, and strength, 
Through the Qur’an’s effulgence, its servant 
Has unfaltering knowledge, an unsilenceable voice; 
He has an unerring heart, an unquenchable light. 

Many friends, as well as a military commander under whose surveillance I was, 
repeatedly  asked:  “Why  don’t  you  apply  for  the  release  papers  and  present  a 
petition?” 

T h e  A n s w e r : I do not apply and I cannot apply for five or six reasons: 
The  First:  I  did  not  interfere  in  the  worldly’s  world  that  I  should  have  been 
convicted and so apply to them. I was convicted by divine determining; my faults are 
before it, and I apply to it. 

The  Second:  I  believe  and  have  certain  knowledge  that  this  world  is  a  swiftly 
changing guesthouse. It is not the true homeland and everywhere is the same. Since I 
will not remain permanently in my home region, it is pointless to struggle for it; it is 
not  worth  going  there.  Since  everywhere  is  a  guesthouse,  if  the  mercy  of  the 
guesthouse’s  Owner  befriends one,  everyone  is  a  friend  and  everywhere  is  familiar. 
Whereas if it does not befriend one, everywhere is a load on the heart and everyone is 
hostile. 

The Third: Application should be within the framework of the law, but the way I 
have been treated these six  years has been arbitrary and outside the law. The Exiles’ 
Law was not applied to me. They looked on me as being stripped of all the rights of 
civilization and even of all worldly rights. It is meaningless to apply  in the  name of 
the law to those whose treatment of me has been thus outside the law. 

The Fourth: This year, the local official applied in my name for me to stay for a 

few days in the village of Bedre, which is a sort of district of  

 

94

Barla, for a change of air. How can those who reject such an unimportant request be 
applied to? To apply to them would be a futile, degrading abasement. 

The Fifth: To claim a right before those who claim a wrong to be right, and to 
apply to them, is a wrong. It is disrespectful towards right. I do not want to perpetrate 
such a wrong and show disrespect for right. And that’s that! 

The Sixth: The distress and difficulty the worldly have caused me has not been 
due  to  politics,  because  they  know  I  do  not  meddle  in  politics  but  flee  from  them. 
Rather,  knowingly  or  unknowingly,  they  torment  me  on  account  of  aggressive 
atheism because I adhere to religion. In which case, to apply to them infers regretting 
religion and flattering the cause of aggressive atheism. 

Moreover,  divine  determining,  which  is  just,  would  punish  me  through  their 
tyrannical  hand  if  I  applied  to  them  and  had  recourse  to  them,  for  they  oppress  me 
because I am religious. As for divine determining, from time to time it represses me 
due  to  my  hypocrisy  before  the  worldly,  because  I  am  deficient  in  religion  and  in 
sincerity. Since this is so, for the time being I cannot be saved from this distress. If I 
apply to the worldly, divine determining would say: “Hypocrite! Pay the penalty for 
applying!”  And  if  I  do  not  apply,  the  worldly  say:  “You  don’t  recognize  us,  go  on 
suffering difficulties!” 

The Seventh Reason: It is well-known that the official’s duty is to allow harmful 
individuals  no  opportunity  to  cause  harm  and  to  assist  those  who  are  beneficial. 
Whereas the official who took me into custody approached me, an elderly guest at the 
door of the  grave, when I was expounding a  subtle aspect of belief contained in the 
phrase “There is no god but God,” as though I were perpetrating some misdemeanour, 
although  he  had  not  been  to  me  for  a  long  time  previously.  He  caused  the  sincere 
unfortunate who was listening to be deprived of the instruction, and made me angry. 
But there were other people there, and he gave them no importance. Then when they 
acted discourteously in a way that would poison the life of the village, he started to be 
gracious and appreciative towards them. 

Furthermore,  it  is  well-known  that  someone  in  prison  who  has  committed  a 
hundred crimes can meet with the official supervising him whether he be of high rank 
or  low.  But  during  this  last  year,  although  two  people  important  in  the  eyes  of  the 
national  government  who  were  charged  with  supervising  me  have  passed  by  my 
house several times, they have absolutely neither met with me nor asked after me. At 
first I supposed that they avoided me out of enmity, then it transpired that it was due 
to their  

 

95

fearful  suspicions;  they  were  fleeing  from  me  as  though  as  I  were  going  to  gobble 
them  up.  So  to  recognize  a  government  whose  members and  officials  are  like  them 
and have recourse to it and apply to it, is not sensible but a futile abasement. If it had 
been the Old Said, he would have said like ‘Antara: 

The very water of life becomes Hell through abasement, 
Whereas Hell with dignity becomes a place of pride.8 

The Old Said no longer exists and the New Said considers it meaningless to talk 
with the worldly. Let their world be the end of them! They can do what they like. He 
is silent, saying, we shall be judged together with them at the Last Judgement. 

The  Eighth  Reason  for  my  not  applying:  According  to  the rule,  “The  result of 
illicit  love  is  merciless  torment,”  divine  determining,  which  is  just,  torments  me 
through the tyrannous hand of the worldly, because I  incline towards them and they 
are  not  worthy  of  it.  So  saying, “I  deserve  this torment,”  I  remain  silent.  For  in  the 
Great  War  I  fought  as  the  commander  of  a  volunteer  regiment.  Applauded  by  the 
Commander-in-Chief of the army and Enver Paﬂa, I sacrificed my valuable students 
and  friends.  I  was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner.  Returning  from  captivity,  I  cast 
myself into danger through such works as The Seven Steps, aiming them at the heads 
of the British, who had occupied Istanbul. I assisted those who now hold me without 
reason  in  this  torturous  captivity.  As  for  them,  they  punish  me  in  this  way  for  that 
help. Those friends here cause me in three months the hardship and distress I suffered 
in three  years as a prisoner-of-war in Russia. Nor did the Russians prevent me from 
giving  religious  instruction,  although  they  regarded  me  as  a  Kurdish  militia 
commander,  a  cruel  man  who  had  slaughtered  Cossacks  and  prisoners.  I  used  to 
instruct  the  great  majority  of  my  ninety  fellow-officer  prisoners.  One  time,  the 
Russian commander came and listened. Because he did not know Turkish, he thought 
it was political instruction and put a stop to it. Then later he gave permission. Also, in 
the same barracks we made a room into a mosque and I used to lead the prayers. They 
did not interfere at all. They did not prevent me from mixing, or from communicating, 
with the others. Whereas my friends here, my fellow citizens and co-religionists and 
those for whose benefits in the form of religious belief I have struggled, have held me 
in  distressing  captivity  not  for  three  years  but  for  six,  for  absolutely  no  reason  and 
although they know I have severed all my relations with the world. They  

                                                 
8 Majid Tarrad (ed.), Diwan ‘Antara (n.p., n.d.), 135. 

 

96

have prevented me mixing with others. They have prevented me from giving religious 
instruction despite my having a certificate, and even from giving private instruction in 
my room. They have prevented me from communicating with others. They have even 
barred me from the mosque which  I repaired and where I  acted as prayer-leader for 
four  years,  although  I  had  the  necessary  certificate.  And  now,  to deprive  me  of  the 
merit  of  performing  the  prayers  in  congregation,  they  do  not  accept  me  as  prayer-
leader even for three private individuals, my permanent congregation and brothers of 
the hereafter. 

Furthermore, if, although I do not want it, someone is to call me good, the official 
who  holds  me  in  surveillance  is  jealous  and  angry.  Thinking  he  will  destroy  my 
influence,  he  entirely  unscrupulously  takes  precautions  and  pesters  me  in  order  to 
curry favour with his superiors. 

Who  can  someone  in  such  a  position  have  recourse  to  anyone  other  than  God 
Almighty?  If  the  judge  is  also  the  claimant,  of  course  he  cannot  complain  to  him. 
Come on, you say, what can we say to this? You say what  you like, I say this: there 
are  many  dissemblers  among  these  friends  of  mine.  A  dissembler  is  worse  than  an 
unbeliever. That  is the reason they make me suffer what the  infidel Russian did  not 
make me suffer. 

You unfortunates! What have I done to you and what I am doing? I am trying to 
save  your belief and am serving  your eternal  happiness! It means that my service  is 
not sincere and purely for God’s sake so that it has the reverse effect. In return, you 
torment me at every opportunity. For sure, we shall meet at the Last Judgement. I say: 

God is enough for us and the best of protectors.(3:173) * The best of lords 
and the best of helpers.(8:40; 22:78) 

                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

 

97

The Seventeenth Letter 

[The Addendum to the Twenty-Fifth Flash] 

A Letter of Condolence 
On the Death of a Child 

And in His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

My Dear Brother of the hereafter, Hafız Halid Efendi! 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
And give good news to the patient, * Those who when afflicted with calamity 
say: To God do we belong and to Him is our return.(2:155-6) 

My  brother,  your  child’s  death  saddened  me,  but,  “the  command 
is 
God’s,”(40:12)  being  resigned  to  the  divine  decree  and  submitting  to  divine 
determining are marks of Islam. May Almighty God grant you all patience, and may 
He make the deceased a helper and intercessor for you in the hereafter. I shall explain 
five points which are truly good news and offer real consolation for you, and for pious 
believers like you: 

F i r s t  P o i n t : The meaning of the phrase, “immortal youths”(56:17; 76:19) 
in the All-Wise Qur’an is this: with this phrase, the verse indicates and gives the good 
news  that  the  children  of  believers  who  die  before  reaching  maturity  will  remain 
perpetually as eternal, lovable children in a form worthy of Paradise; that they will be 
an everlasting source of happiness in the embrace of their fathers and mothers who go 
to  Paradise;  and  will  ensure  that  their  parents  receive  the  sweetest  of  pleasures, the 
loving  and  carressing  of  children;  and  that  all  pleasurable  things  will  be  found  in 
Paradise; that those who say that since Paradise is not the place for reproduction there 
will be no loving and carressing of children, are not correct;  

 

98

and  that  gaining  millions  of  years  of  pure,  painfree  loving  and  caressing  of  eternal 
children instead of a brief ten  years or so of loving them mixed with the sorrows of 
this world, is a source of great happiness for believers. 

S e c o n d  P o i n t : One time when a man was in prison they sent one of his 
lovable  children  to  him.  The  unhappy  prisoner  suffered  both  his  own  sorrows,  and 
since  he  could  not  make  the  child  happy,  he  also  suffered  at  his  pain.  Then  the 
compassionate  judge sent someone to him with a message which said: “For sure the 
child is  yours, but he is my  subject and one of my people. I shall take him to a fine 
palace  and  look  after  him  there.” The  man  wept in  anguish.  He  said:  “I  won’t  give 
you  my  child,  he  is  my  one  comfort!”  His  friends  said  to  him:  “Your  grief  is 
meaningless. If it is the child you pity, he will go to a spacious, happy palace in place 
of this dirty, distressing dungeon. If you are sorry for yourself and seeking your own 
interests, you will suffer much distress and pain at the child’s difficulties if he remains 
here, in addition to the single dubious, temporary benefit you receive. If he goes there, 
it will be of manifold advantage for you, for he will attract the king’s mercy and will 
be  an  intercessor  for  you. The  king  will  want  you  to  see  him,  and  he  is  sure  not  to 
send him to the prison, so he will release  you, summon you to the palace, and allow 
you  to  meet  with  the  child there.  But on  condition  you  have  confidence  in  the  king 
and you obey him!” 

My dear brother, like this comparison, you must think as follows, as should other 
believers  if  their  children  die:  the  child  was  innocent  and  his  Creator  is  All-
Compassionate and All-Generous. He has taken him to His perfect grace and mercy in 
place  of  my  deficient  upbringing  and  compassion.  He  has  released  him  from  the 
grievous,  calamitous,  difficult  prison  of  this  world  and  sent  him  to  the  gardens  of 
Paradise. How happy for the child! If he had stayed in this world, who knows how he 
would have grown up. Therefore, I do not pity him, I know him to be fortunate. There 
remains my own benefits, and I don’t pity myself in connection with them, and I am 
not sad and sorry. For if he had remained in the world, he would have had ten years of 
a  child’s  temporary  love  mixed  with  pains.  Then  if  he  had been  righteous  and if  he 
had been capable in worldly matters, perhaps he would have helped me. But by dying, 
he  has  become  a  sort of intercessor  who  will  win  me  ten  million  years  of  a  child’s 
love  in  eternal  Paradise  and  everlasting  happiness.  Certainly,  a  person  who  loses  a 
doubtful, immediate benefit and gains a thousand certain, postponed benefits does not 
weep and lament, nor cry out in despair. 

T h i r d  P o i n t : The child who died was the creature, possession, servant, and 

with all his members the artefact of the Most Compassionate  

 

99

Creator;  he  belonged  to  Him  and was  a  friend  of  his  parents,  put  temporarily  under 
their supervision. The Creator made the parents the child’s servants. In return for their 
services, He gave them pleasurable compassion as an immediate wage. Now, if as the 
requirement  of  mercy  and  wisdom,  the  Compassionate  Creator,  who  owns  nine 
hundred  and  ninety-nine shares  of  the  child  out of  a thousand,  takes  the  child  from 
you  and  puts  an  end  to  your  service,  to  cry  out  in  grief  and  despair  due  to  that 
apparent single share in the face of the true owner of the thousand shares in a way that 
infers  complaint,  does  not befit  a  believer;  it  befits  rather  the  people of  neglect  and 
misguidance. 

Fo  u  r  t  h    P  o  i  n  t  :  If  the  world  had  been  eternal,  and  man  was  to  have 
remained  in  it  eternally,  and  separation  had  been  unending;  grievous  sorrow  and 
despairing woe would have had some meaning. But since this world is a guesthouse, 
wherever the dead child has gone, you, and we too, shall go there. Moreover, he is not 
the only one to die; it is a general highway. And, since separation is not for ever, you 
will meet with him in the future, both in the Intermediate Realm and in the hereafter. 
One should say: “The command is God’s. He gave him and He took him away;” and: 
“All praise be to God for all circumstances,” and offer thanks in patience. 

F i f t h  P o i n t : Compassion, one of the most subtle, beautiful, agreeable, and 
sweet manifestations of divine mercy, is a luminous elixir. It is much more direct than 
passionate love; it is a swift means of union with Almighty God. Temporary love and 
worldly  love  are  transformed  into  true  love  and  find  Almighty  God  only  with  the 
greatest  difficulty,  but  compassion  binds  the  heart  to  Him  in  purer,  more  direct 
fashion – and without difficulty. Both father and mother love their child more than all 
the world. If they are fortunate and are true believers, when he is taken from them it 
turns their faces from this world and they find the True Bestower of Bounties. They 
say:  “The  world  is  transitory  and  not  worth  binding  one’s  heart  to.”  They  become 
attached to where the child has gone, and this gains high spiritual rank for them. 

The  people of  neglect  and  misguidance  are  deprived  of  the  happiness  and  good 
news of these five points. You can see from the following how grievous their situation 
is: they see their only child in the throes of death, and because they imagine the world 
is eternal and as a result of their heedlessness and misguidance, they suppose death is 
non-existence  and  eternal  separation.  They  think  of  him  in  the  earth  of his  grave  in 
place  of  his  soft  bed,  and  due  to  their  heedlessness  or  misguidance,  the  merciful 
Paradise  and  bounteous  heaven  of  the  Most  Compassionate  of  the  Compassionate 
does not occur to them. You can see by comparison the despairing sorrow  

 

100

and  grief  they  suffer.  Whereas  belief  and  Islam  say  to  the  believer:  the  Most 
Compassionate Creator will take this child of yours who is in the throes of death from 
this  lowly  world  to  Paradise.  He  will  make  him  both  an  intercessor  for  you,  and  an 
eternal  child.  Don’t  worry,  separation  is  temporary!  Say:  “The  command  is 
God’s.(40:12) * To God do we belong and to Him shall we return,”(2:156) and bear it 
patiently. 

                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One!  

 

101

The Eighteenth Letter 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

 [This letter consists of three important matters.] 

FIRST IMPORTANT MATTER 

Famous  saints  like  Muhyi’l-Din  al-‘Arabi  (May  his  mystery  be  sanctified),  the 
author  of  al-Futuhat  al-Makkiya,  and  Sayyid  ‘Abd  al-Karim  (May  his  mystery  be 
sanctified), the author of a well-known book entitled al-Insan al-Kamil,1 speak of the 
seven  levels of the globe of the earth and the white earth beyond the Kaf mountain, 
and  strange things  which  in  Futuhat  are  called  “mashmashiya.”  Are  these  true?  But 
these  places  do  not  exist  on  the  earth.  Furthermore, the  things  that  they  say are  not 
accepted by geography and science. And if they are not true, how can they be saints? 
How can people who say things contrary to reality and the truth in this way be people 
of reality? 

T h e  A n s w e r : They  were the people of truth and reality. They were also 
saints  and  experienced  direct  vision  of  the  realities.  They  saw  correctly  what  they 
saw,  but  since  they  were  not  correct in  declarations  they  made  while  in  the  state  of 
illumination  and  witnessing,  which 
in  their 
interpretations of their visions, which were like dreams, they were partially incorrect. 
People  of  unveiling  and  direct  vision  of  that  sort  cannot  interpret  their  own  visions 
while in such a state, just as a person cannot interpret his own dream while dreaming 
it. Those who can interpret them are the exact scholars of the legacy of prophethood, 
called “the purified ones.” For sure, when they rise to the rank of the purified  

is  without  comprehension,  and 

                                                 
1 ‘Abd al-Karim al-Jili 767/1365-6–832/1428, al-Insan al-Kamil fi Ma’rifat al-Awakhir wa’l-Awa’il. 

 

102

ones,  the  people  of  direct  vision  belonging  to  that  group  understand  their  errors 
through  the  guidance  of  the  Qur’an  and  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  practices,  and  they 
correct them; and they did correct them. 

Listen to this story which is the form of a comparison and will illustrate this truth. 

It is like this: 

One time, there were two shepherds who were from among those who approach 
reality with their hearts. They milked their sheep into a wooden pail and put the pail 
beside them. They  laid their shepherd’s pipe on the pail, then one of them stretched 
out, overcome by sleep. He slept for a while. The other shepherd was watching him 
carefully  when  he  saw  something  like  a  fly  emerge  from  the  sleeping  man’s  nose, 
look  at  the  pail  of  milk,  enter  the  pipe  at  one  end,  emerge  from  the  other,  then 
disappear into a hole under a bush. Some while later the thing emerged again, passed 
down the shepherd’s pipe, entered the sleeping man’s nose, whereupon he awoke. He 
exclaimed: “I had an extraordinary dream!” His friend replied: “May God make good 
come of  it.  What  was  it?”  The  other  man  said: “I  saw  a  sea  of  milk  stretching  over 
which  was a  strange  bridge.  The  upper part of  the  bridge  was  closed  and contained 
windows. I passed through the bridge. I saw a grove of oaks, the tops of which were 
all  pointed.  Beneath  them  was  a  cave;  I  entered  it,  and  I  saw  some  treasure  full  of 
gold. How can this be interpreted, I wonder?” 

His alert friend said to him: “The sea of milk you saw was this wooden pail, and 
the bridge, our shepherd’s pipe. The pointed oak trees were this bush, while the cave 
was this small hole. Get the pickaxe and I’ll show you the treasure.” He brought the 
pick  and  they  dug  under  the  bush,  and  there they  found  gold  enough  to  make  them 
both prosperous in this world. 

Thus,  what  the  sleeping  man  dreamt  was  right,  and  what  he  saw,  correct,  but 
because he had no comprehension while dreaming and no right to interpret the dream, 
he could not distinguish between the physical world and the non-material world and 
his assertions were partially wrong; he said: “I saw an actual physical sea.” But since 
the man who was awake could distinguish between the physical world and the World 
of Similitudes, he had the right to interpret the dream; he said: “What you saw in the 
dream  was  right,  but  it  wasn’t  an  actual  sea;  our  milk  pail  appeared  to  your 
imagination as a  sea, and our pipe as a bridge, and so on.” This means the physical 
and spiritual worlds have to be distinguished from one another. If they are combined, 
assertions about them appear wrong.  

For example, you have a small room the four walls of which have been covered 
with four large mirrors. When you enter it, you see the small room to be as broad as a 
large arena. If you say, “My room appears to be as large  

 

103

as a broad arena,” what you say is correct. But if you assert, “My room is as large as a 
broad  arena,”  you  would be  wrong,  for  you  are confusing  the  World  of Similitudes 
with the actual world. 

Thus,  having  failed  to  weigh them  on  the  balances  of  the  Book  and  Sunna, the 
descriptions of the seven levels of the  globe made by certain people of unveiling do 
not refer only to its physical state from the point of view of geography. For instance, 
they said that one of the earth’s levels is that inhabited by the jinns and demons, and 
that it has a breadth of thousands of years. But those strange levels are not found on 
our globe, which makes its circuit every one or two years. However, if we suppose the 
globe to be like a pine-seed in the World of Meaning, the World of Similitudes, the 
Intermediate Realm, and the World of Spirits, the similitude of the tree formed from it 
would  be  like  a  huge  pine-tree  in  relation  to  the  seed.  Thus,  in  the  course  of  their 
spiritual journeyings, some of the people of direct vision have observed that some of 
the  earth’s  levels  in  the  World  of  Similitudes  are extremely  extensive  and  that  they 
stretch over a distance of thousands of  years. What they  saw  was right, but because 
superficially the World of Similitudes resembles the physical world, they saw the two 
worlds blended together, and interpreted them thus. When they returned to the world 
of  sobriety,  since  they  lacked  balance,  and  since  they  wrote  exactly  what  they 
witnessed, it has been thought to be contrary to reality. 

Like the similitudes of a large palace and large garden may be found in a small 
mirror,  so  similitudes  and  non-material  realities  as  extensive  as  thousands  of  years 
may be situated in a single year’s distance in the physical world. 

Conclusion: It is understood from this matter that the degree of direct  vision  is 
far  inferior  to  that  of  belief  in  the  Unseen.  That  is  to  say,  the  uncomprehending 
disclosures  of  some  of  the  saints  relying  only  on  direct  vision  do  not  attain  to  the 
statements about the truths of faith made by the purified and exact scholars, who are 
the people of the legacy of prophethood and who rely on the Qur’an and Revelation, 
not  on  direct  vision  –  their  statements  that  are  about  the  Unseen  but  are  lucid, 
comprehensive,  and  right.  That  is  to  say,  the  balance  of  all  illuminations,  mental 
states,  visions,  and  unveilings  are  the Book  and Sunna,  and  their  touchstone  are the 
sacred principles of the Book and Sunna, and the conjectural laws of the purified and 
exacting scholars. 

SECOND IMPORTANT MATTER 

Q u e s t i o n :  The Unity of Existence is considered by many people to be the 
most elevated station, but there was no explicit sign of it among the Companions and 
foremost the four Rightly-Guided Caliphs, who were at  

 

104

the level of the greatest sainthood, or among the Imams of the Prophet’s Family and 
foremost  the  five  People  of  the  Cloak,  or  the  great  interpreters  of  the  law  and  the 
generation  following the Companions and foremost the founders of the four schools 
of law. So did those who lived later advance further than them? Did they find a better 
highway on which to proceed? 

T h e  A n s w e r :  God forbid! Nobody at all has the ability to advance further 
than  those  purified  ones  who  were  the  stars  and  heirs  closest  to  the  Sun  of 
Prophethood; the highway is indeed theirs. 

As for the Unity of Existence, it is a way and a state, but it is deficient. However, 
because it is illuminating and pleasurable, most of those who have reached that degree 
on their  spiritual  journeyings  have  not  wanted  to  leave  it;  they  have  remained  there 
and supposed it to be the ultimate degree. 

If  the  spirit  of  the  person  who  takes  this  way  is  divested  of  materiality  and 
intermediaries  and  he  has  rent  the  veil  of  causes,  and  is  immersed  in  a  state  of 
witnessing,  then  an  experiential  –  not  pertaining  to  knowledge  –  unity  of  existence 
that  arises  not  from  the  Unity  of  Existence  but  from  the  Unity  of  Witnessing,  may 
obtain for him a certain attainment, a spiritual station. He may even reach the degree 
of  denying  the  universe  for  God’s  sake.  But  if  he  is  submerged  in  causes  and 
preoccupied with materiality, for him, the Unity of Existence may mean going so far 
as denying God on account of the universe.  

Yes,  the  great  highway  is  the  highway  of  the  Companions,  and  those  that 
followed them, and the Purified Ones. Their universal rule was, “the reality of things 
is  constant.”2  In  accordance  with  the  sense  of  “There  is  nothing  that  resembles 
Him,”(42:11) Almighty God has absolutely nothing that resembles Him. He is utterly 
beyond  being  comprehended  in  place  or  class  and  being  divided  into  parts.  His 
relation with beings  is creativity.  Beings are  not imaginings or fancies as those who 
followed  the  way  of  the  Unity  of  Existence  said.  Visible  things  too  are  Almighty 
God’s works. Everything is not “Him,” everything is “from Him.” For events cannot 
be pre-eternal. We shall make this matter easier to understand with two comparisons: 

T h e  F i r s t : For example, there is a king. Through his name of Just Judge he 
has a Ministry of Justice which shows the manifestation of that name. Another of his 
names  is  Khalifa,  and  the  Shaikh  al-Islam’s  Office  and  learned  institution  are  the 
manifestations of that  name. He has also the  name of Commander-in-Chief, through 
which all the offices of the army perform their actions; the army is the manifestation 
of that name. Now, if  

                                                 
2 ‘Umar al-Nasafi, al-Aqa’id, 1. 

 

105

someone were to appear and say: “The king is only the Just Judge, he has no office or 
ministry  other  than  that  of  justice,”  then  the  attributes  and  states  of  the  religious 
scholars in the Shaykh al-Islam’s Office would have to be applied – not actually but 
theoretically  –  to  the  officials  of  the  Ministry  of  Justice;  a  secondary  and  shadowy 
Shaykh  al-Islam’s  Office  would  have  an  imaginary  existence  within  the  actual 
Ministry of Justice. Again in hypothetical fashion, the dealings and states of the Army 
Office  would  be  ascribed  to  the  officials  of  the  Judiciary,  an  unreal  Army  Office 
would be imagined there, and so on. In this situation, the king’s true name is the name 
of Just Judge and his true sovereignty is his sovereignty in the Ministry of Justice. His 
names like Khalifa, Commander-in-Chief, and Sultan are not actual but hypothetical. 
However, the  nature of kingship and reality of  sovereignty demand all the  names  in 
actuality. And actual names require and necessitate actual offices. 

Thus, the sovereignty of divinity necessitates in actuality numerous sacred names 
like All-Merciful, Provider, Bestower, Creator, Doer, Munificent, and Compassionate. 
And those true and actual names require actual mirrors. Now, since the followers of 
the Unity of Existence say: “There is no existent but He,” they downgrade the reality 
of beings to the level of imagination. Almighty  God’s names of Necessary Existent, 
Existent,  One,  and  Single  have  true  manifestations  and  spheres  of  application.  For 
sure, if their mirrors and spheres of application were not real and were imaginary and 
non-existent,  it  would  not  harm  them.  And  perhaps  if  there  were  no  colour  of 
existence in the mirror of true existence, they would be purer and more brilliant, but 
the  manifestations  of  such  names  as  Merciful,  Provider,  Subduer,  Compeller,  and 
Creator  would  not  be  real,  they  would  be  hypothetical.  However,  those  names  are 
realities  like  the  name  of  Existent,  they  cannot  be  shadows;  they  are  essential,  not 
secondary. 

Thus, the Companions and great interpreters of the law and Imams of the Family 
of  the  Prophet  said:  “The  reality  of  things  is  constant;”  Almighty  God  has  a 
manifestation  through  all  His  names  in  actuality.  Through  His  creativity,  all  things 
have  an  accidental  existence.  For  sure,  in  relation  to  the  Necessarily  Existent’s 
existence  their  existence  is  an  extremely  weak  and  unstable  shadow,  but  it  is  not 
imagination,  it  is  not  fancy.  Almighty  God  gives  existence  through  His  name  of 
Creator and He continues that existence. 

S e c o n d  C o m p a r i s o n :  For example, on the four walls of this house are 
four full-length mirrors. However much the house is depicted together with the other 
three mirrors in all the mirrors, each holds the things  in  itself in accordance with  its 
own make-up and colour; it reflects a  

 

106

similitude of the house that is particular to itself. Now, two men enter the house. One 
of them looks at one of the mirrors and says: “Everything is within it.” When he hears 
of the other mirrors and the images in them, he applies what he hears to a tiny corner 
of  the  one  mirror  whose  contents  are  shadows  twice  over,  and  whose  reality  has 
shrunk  and  has  changed.  He also  says:  “I  see  it  thus,  in  which  case  reality  is  thus.” 
The other man says to him, “Yes, you see it like that and what you see is true. But in 
actuality  and  reality  the  true  form of  reality  is  not like  that.  There  are  other  mirrors 
besides the one you looked at; they are not the shadow of shadows and as tiny as you 
saw.” 

Thus, each of the divine  names requires a different mirror. And, since Merciful 
and  Provider,  for  example,  are  real  and  fundamental,  they  require  beings  worthy  of 
them who are needy for sustenance and compassion. Just as All-Merciful requires real 
beings  with  spirits  needy  for  sustenance  in  a  real  world,  so  too,  All-Compassionate 
requires  a  paradise  which  is  thus  real. To  maintain  that  only  the  names  of Existent, 
Necessarily  Existent,  and Single  One  of  Unity  are  real  and  that the other  names are 
mere shadows within them, is a sort of injustice towards those other names. 

It  is  due  to  this  mystery  that  the  great  highway  is  surely  the  highway  of  the 
Companions,  the  Purified  Ones,  the  Imams  of  the  Prophet’s  Family,  and  the  great 
interpreters of the law and founders of the four schools of law, who possessed greater 
sainthood and were directly the first class of the Qur’an’s students. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 
O  our  Sustainer!  Do  not  cause  our  hearts  to  swerve  now  that  You  have 
guided us, and bestow  mercy  on us  from  You; for  You are  the  Bestower  of  
Gifts.(3:8) 
O  God!  Grant  blessings  to  the  one  whom  You  sent  as  a  Mercy  to  all  the 
worlds, and to all his Family and Companions. 

An Addendum to the Second Matter 

Q u e s t i o n : Muhyi’l-Din al-‘Arabi considered the Unity of Existence to be of 
the  highest  level.  Likewise,  some  of  the  great  saints  who  took  the  path  of  love 
followed him. However, you say that this matter is not of the highest level, and is not 
real;  that  it  is  rather  the  way,  to  a  degree,  of  those  who  become  intoxicated  and 
immersed in the divine, and of the people of love and ecstasy. So what, briefly, is the 
high level of the affir 

 

107

mation  of  divine  unity  pointed  out  by  the  clear  verses  of  the  Qur’an,  through  the 
mystery of the legacy of prophethood? Can you explain it? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  It  is  a  hundred  times  beyond  the  ability  of  an  utterly 
powerless  unfortunate  like  myself  to  judge  those  elevated  stations  with  his  limited 
thought.  I  shall  just  explain  one  or  two  extremely  brief  points  proceeding  from  the 
effulgence  of  the  Wise  Qur’an.  Perhaps  they  will  be  useful  in  understanding  the 
matter. 

First Point   

There  are  many  reasons  for  becoming  embroiled  in  the  way  of  the  Unity  of 

Existence. One or two of them may be explained as follows: 

The  First  Reason:  Because  they  could  not  squeeze  into  their  brains  the 
maximum  degree  of  the  creativity  of  divine  dominicality,  nor  entirely  establish  in 
their hearts the idea that everything, through the mystery of divine oneness (ehadiyet), 
is held directly in the grasp of dominicality and that all things have existence through 
divine  power,  choice,  and  will,  those  who  took  that  way  were  obliged  to  say  that 
everything  is  either  Him,  or  does  not  have  existence,  or  is  imaginary,  or  is  His 
manifestation or emanation. 

The  Second  Reason:  The  mark  of  passionate  love  is  to  want  never  to  be 
separated from the beloved and to flee desperately from such separation; to tremble at 
the thought of parting, to fear distance from the beloved as though fearing Hell, and to 
abominate transience; to love union with the love of one’s own spirit and life, and to 
yearn  for  nearness  to  the  beloved  as  though  longing  for  Paradise.  Thus,  through 
adhering to a manifestation of divine immediacy in all things, those who took the way 
of  the  Unity  of  Existence  disregarded  separation and  distance;  supposing  union  and 
meeting  to  be  permanent,  they  said:  “There  is  no  existent  but  He;”  through  the 
intoxication  of  love  and  as  demanded  by  the  ecstasy  of  permanence,  meeting,  and 
union,  they  imagined  that  in  the  Unity  of  Existence  was  a  most  pleasurable way  of 
illumination whereby they could be saved from the dreadfulness of separation.  

That is to say, the first reason sprang from the fact that the hand of their intellects 
was unable to reach up to some of the truths of belief, which were  extremely broad 
and  elevated;  they  were  unable  to  comprehend  them  and  had  not  developed 
completely  in  regard  to  faith.  And  the  source  of  the  second  reason  was  the 
extraordinary  unfolding  of  their  hearts  in  respect  of  love,  and  their  wondrous 
expansion and breadth. 

However, the supreme level of divine unity that the Purified Ones  – who were 

the people of sobriety and great saints of the legacy of prophet 

 

108

hood –  saw  through  the  clear  expositions  of  the  Qur’an  is  both  extremely  elevated, 
and  shows  both  the  maximum  level  of  dominicality  and  creativity,  and  that  all  the 
divine  names  are  real.  It  preserves  the  Qur’an’s  principles  and  does  not  spoil  the 
balance of the decrees of dominicality. For they say that together with the oneness of 
His  essence  and  His  being  free  of  space,  with  His  knowledge  Almighty  God 
encompasses and determines directly all things together with all their attributes, and 
through  His  will  He  chooses  and  specifies  them,  and  through  His  power  He  creates 
them. He creates and directs the whole universe as though it were a single being. 

He  creates  the  huge  spring  with  the  same  ease  as  creating  a  flower.  Nothing 
obstructs  anything  else.  There  is  no  fragmentation  in  His  regarding  things.  He  is 
present  everywhere  at  the  same  instant  through  the  disposal  of  His  knowledge  and 
power.  There  is  no  division  or  distribution  in  His  disposal.  This  mystery  has  been 
expounded and proved completely in the Sixteenth Word and in the Second Stopping-
Place  of  the  Thirty-Second  Word.  Since,  according  to  the  rule,  “Comparisons  are 
incontestible,” no attention should be paid to defects in comparisons and allegories, I 
shall set forth a very  faulty  comparison so that the difference between the two ways 
may be understood to a degree. 

For example, let us imagine a huge, matchless, and wondrously adorned peacock 
which can fly from east to west in an instant, and opens and closes its wings, which 
stretch from north to south, are adorned with hundreds of thousands of fine patterns, 
and  in  every  single  feather  of  which  are  included  brilliant  arts.  Now,  there  are  two 
men observing it; they want to fly up with the wings of the intellect and heart to the 
elevated qualities of this bird, to its wondrous decorations. One looks at the peacock’s 
appearance and form and the marvellous inscriptions of power on all its feathers; he 
loves it with extreme passion and ardour; he in part abandons his attentive reflective 
thought  and  clings  on  to  love.  But  then  he  sees  that  every  day  those  lovable 
decorations  change  and  are  transformed.  Those  objects  of  his  love,  which  he 
worships, disappear and are lost. 

While  he  should  have  said  that  through  true  divine  unity,  which  he  could  not 
encompass  with  his  mind,  and  absolute  dominicality  and  the  oneness  of  the  divine 
essence,  they  were  the  artistic  decorations  of  an  Inscriber  possessing  universal 
creativity, he said instead – in order to console himself – that the spirit of the peacock 
was so sublime that its maker was within it, or that the peacock had become Him, and 
that since its spirit had become one with its being and its being had combined with its 
outward  appearance,  its  spirit’s  perfection  and  being’s  exaltedness  displayed  those 
manifestations, displaying every moment a different inscription and beauty;  

 

109

it was not a true creation through its will, but a manifestation, an emanation. 

As for the other man, he said that those harmonious, orderly decorations so full of 
art definitely required will, choice, intention, and purpose. It was impossible for there 
to be a manifestation without will, an emanation without choice. 

Yes, the peacock had a beautiful and elevated nature, but it could not be the doer; 
it was passive. It could not become one with the active agent. Its spirit was fine and 
exalted, but it could not be the creator and disposer, only receptive and a means. For 
observedly  in each of  its feathers was an art performed with infinite wisdom and an 
inscription and decoration made through an infinite power. And these could not occur 
without will and choice. The arts indicating perfect wisdom within perfect power, and 
perfect dominicality and mercy within perfect wisdom were not the work of some sort 
of manifestation. The scribe who had written that gilded notebook could not be inside 
it  and  be  united  with  it.  The  notebook  rather  only  had  contact  with  the  nib  of  the 
scribe’s pen. In which case, the wondrous decorations of the similitude of the peacock 
known as the universe were a gilded missive of the peacock’s Creator. 

Now, look at the peacock and read the missive. Say to its Scribe: “What wonders 
God  has  willed!  Blessed  be  God!  Glory  be  to  God!”  The  person  who  supposes  the 
missive to be the scribe, or the scribe to be inside the letter, or fancies the missive to 
be imagination, has surely hidden his reason in the veils of love and is unable to see 
the true form of reality. 

Among the varieties of passionate love, the one most conducive to the way of the 
Unity  of  Existence,  is  love  of  this  world.  When  it  turns  into  true  love,  love  of  this 
world,  which  is  temporary  (mecazî),  is  transformed  into  the  Unity  of  Existence.  A 
person loves his personal beloved with worldly (mecazî) love. Then, unable to accept 
in his heart his beloved’s transience and ephemerality, he consoles himself by saying 
that  his  beloved  is  a  mirror  reflecting  the  beauty  of  the  True  Object  of  Love  and 
Worship, and attaches himself to a reality, so acquiring permanence for him through 
true love. 

In  the  same  way,  when, due  to the  constant  blows  of  death  and  separation,  the 
strange love of the person who takes the huge world and the universe in its totality as 
his beloved is transformed into true love, he seeks refuge in the way of the Unity of 
Existence, in order to save that great beloved of his from death and separation. If he 
has  extremely  powerful  and  elevated  faith,  it  becomes  a  pleasurable,  luminous, 
acceptable level, as with those resembling Muhyi’l-Din al-‘Arabi. However, there is 
the possibility  

 

110

of  falling  into  various  abysses,  embracing  materiality,  and  becoming  submerged  in 
causes.  As  for  the  Unity  of  Witnessing,  it  is  harmless;  it  is  an  exalted  way  of  the 
people of sobriety. 

O God, show us what is indeed the truth, and make us follow it! 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

THIRD MATTER 

An important matter that has not been solved by philosophy and reason. 

Every  day  in  [new]  splendour  does  He  [shine]!(55:29)  *  Indeed,  your 
Sustainer is Doer of what He will.(11:107; 85:16) 

Q u e s t i o n :  What is the reason for the astonishing unceasing activity in the 
universe?  What  is  the  wisdom  in  it?  Why  do these  fleeting  beings  not  stop, but  are 
continuously changed and renewed? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  To  explain  the  wisdom  in  this  would  require  a  thousand 
pages.  So  we  shall  leave  aside  a  full  explanation  and  condense  in  two  pages  an 
extremely brief summary of it. 

If  a  person  performs  a  natural  function  or  social  duty  enthusiastically,  anyone 
who  observes  him  carefully  will  certainly  understand  that  there  are  two  things  that 
make him act in this way: 

The First are the benefits, fruits, and advantages resulting from the duty, which 

are called the ultimate cause. 

The Second: Such things as love, desire, and pleasure cause him to perform the 

duty enthusiastically, and these are called the necessitating cause and reason.  

For  example,  eating  food;  the  pleasurable longing  arising  from  appetite  drive  a 
person  to  eat,  and  afterwards,  the  result  of  eating  is  nourishing  the  body  and 
perpetuating  life.  In  the  same  way,  “And  God’s  is  the  highest  similitude,”(16:60) 
based on two sorts of divine names, the awesome and astonishing endless activity in 
the universe occurs for two vast instances of wisdom, each of which is also infinite: 

The  First:  Almighty  God’s  Most  Beautiful  Names  have  incalculable  sorts  of 
manifestations. The variety in creatures arises from the variety of the manifestations. 
The  names  require  to  be  manifested  in  a  permanent  fashion;  that  is,  they  want  to 
display their embroideries; that is, they want to see and display the manifestations of 
their beauties in the mirrors of their embroideries; that is, they want every instant to 
renew  the  book  of  the  universe  and  missives  of  beings;  that  is,  they  necessitate  the 
continuous mean 

 

111

ingful writing, and to display each missive to the attentive gaze of the Most Pure and 
Holy  Essence,  the  One  signified,  as  well  as  to  all  conscious  beings;  they  require  to 
make each of the missives read. 

The  Second  Reason  and  Instance  of  Wisdom:  Just  as  the  activity  of  creatures 
arises  from  appetite,  desire,  and  pleasure,  and  there  is  a  definite  pleasure  in  all 
activity;  indeed, all  activity  is a sort of pleasure; so too, in a  suitable way  and form 
appropriate  to  His  essential  self-sufficiency  and  absolute  riches  and  in  a  manner 
fitting for His absolute perfection, the Necessarily Existent One has boundless sacred 
compassion  and  infinite  holy  love.  And  He  feels  a  boundless  sacred  ardour  arising 
from that sacred compassion and holy love, and an endless holy joy arising from that 
sacred  ardour,  and,  if  one  may  say  so,  an  infinite  sacred  pleasure  arising  from  the 
sacred joy. And pertaining to that Merciful and Compassionate One, is, if the term is 
permissible, a boundless sacred gratification and  infinite  holy pride arising  from the 
boundless  feeling  of  compassion  that  springs  from  the  sacred  pleasure,  sacred 
gratification  and  pride  which  arise  from  the  gratitude  and  perfections  of  creatures 
which  result  from  their  abilities  emerging  from  the  potential  to  the  actual  and  their 
developing  within  the  activity  of  power.  It  is  these  which  necessitate  in  boundless 
fashion, an endless activity. 

Because  philosophy,  science,  and  natural  philosophy  do  not  know  this  subtle 
instance of wisdom, they have confused unconscious nature, blind chance, and lifeless 
causes in this utterly knowing, wise, percipient activity, and falling into the darkness 
of misguidance, have been unable to find the light of reality. 

Say, “God [sent it down];” then leave them to plunge in vain discourse and 
trifling.(6:91) 
O  our  Sustainer!  Do  not  cause  our  hearts  to  swerve  now  that  You  have 
guided  us,  and  bestow  mercy  upon  us  from  Yourself;  indeed,  You  are  the 
Bestower of Gifts.(3:8) 
O  God!  Grant  blessings  and  peace  to  the  Solver  of  the  talisman  of  Your 
universe  to  the  number  of  atoms  of  beings,  and  to  his  Family  and 
Companions, so long as the earth and the heavens persist. 

                                                                  S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

 

112

The Nineteenth Letter 

This treatise describes more than three hundred miracles. And as it describes the 
messengership  of  Muhammad  (UWBP),  itself  a  miracle,  so  is  it  itself  a  wonder  in 
three or four respects, proceeding from the miracle of his messengership. 

The First : Although  it is more than a  hundred pages  in length and is based on 
traditions and narrations, it was written in an unusual fashion—in the mountains and 
countryside,  completely  from  memory,  and  without  referring  to  any  book.  It  was 
completed, moreover, in  a  few days by working two to three  hours every day,  for a 
total of twelve hours. 

The Second : Despite its length, this work did not cause tedium to its writer, nor 
does it lack pleasantness for its reader. In fact, it aroused such ardour and enthusiasm 
in even my  lazy  scribes that in these hard and distressing times, as many as  seventy 
copies were handwritten  in this neighbourhood within a single  year. Those aware of 
this property of the treatise concluded that this must be a wonder proceeding from the 
miracle of his messengership (Blessings and peace be upon him.) 

The  Third  :  In  the  copies  handwritten  by  nine  different  scribes  who  did  not 
communicate  with  one  another,  including  one  very  inexperienced  and  unaware  of 
‘coincidence’1  – it  was  also  before  we  were  aware  of  the  phenomenon  –  the  words 
referring to the Noble Messenger coincided to such a degree throughout the whole of 
the  treatise,  and  in  the  fifth  part  for  the  words  referring  to  the  Qur’an,  that  anyone 
who is fair to the slightest degree would not consider it to be the result of chance. In 
fact, whoever observed it concluded that it was a mystery of the Unseen and a marvel 
proceeding  from  the  miraculousness  of  Muhammad  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and 
peace). 

                                                 
1 ‘Coincidence’ (T. tevafük; Ar. Tawafuq) refers  to the unintentional correspondence of letters or 
words in lines or patterns on one or several pages. (Tr.) 

113

The  principles  explained  at  the  beginning  of  this  treatise  have  extreme 
importance. As for the prophetic Hadiths related, they are accepted as authentic by the 
authorities on Hadith, and they report the most established phenomena concerning the 
messengership  of  Muhammad  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace).  Now,  to 
enumerate  the  merits  of  this  treatise,  another  treatise  of  the  same  length  would  be 
needed; we therefore invite those who wish to read it, if only once.  

                                                                  S a i d  N u r s i 

 

A REMINDER: In this work, I have related many Hadiths, despite having no books to refer 
to. Should there be any errors in their wording, I request that they either be corrected, or be 
considered as paraphrases. For, according to the prevailing opinion, “To relate the meanings 
of Hadiths is permissible,” in which case the narrator puts the meaning of the Hadith into his 
own words. This being the case, Hadiths with possible errors of wording should be regarded 
as paraphrases. 
* NOTE: The present translation of the Nineteenth Letter is based on a translation prepared 
by members of the Risale-i Nur Institute of America in 1976. (Tr.) 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

114

The Miracles of Muhammad (UWBP) 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
He it is Who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth 
to make  it  supreme  over  all  religion: and  sufficient  is  God as a Witness. * 
Muhammad is the Messenger of God; and those who are with him are strong 
against  unbelievers,  [but]  compassionate  among  each  other.  You  will  see 
them bow and prostrate themselves [in prayer], seeking grace from God and 
[His]  good  pleasure.  On  their  faces  are  their  marks,  [being]  the  traces  of 
their prostration. This is their similitude in the Torah; and their similitude in 
the Gospel is like a seed which send forth its blade, then makes it strong; it 
then becomes thick, and it stands on its own stem, [filling] the sowers  with 
wonder  and  delight.  As  a  result,  it  fills  the  unbelievers  with  rage  at  them. 
God  has  promised  those  among  them  who  believe  and  do  righteous  deeds 
forgiveness, and a great reward.(48:28-9) 

the  Nineteenth  and  Thirty-First  Words  concerning 

the 
 [Since 
messengership  of  Muhammad  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace) 
prove it with decisive evidence, we assign the verification of that side 
of the subject to those Words. As a supplement to them we will merely 
show here, in nineteen ‘Signs,’ some of the flashes of that great truth.] 

FIRST SIGN 

The  Possessor  and  Master  of  the  universe  surely  does  everything  with 
knowledge, disposes every affair with wisdom, directs everything all-seeingly, treats 
everything  all-knowingly,  and  arranges  everything  willing  the  instances  of  wisdom, 
purposes,  and  benefits  that  are  apparent  in  them.  Since,  then,  the  One  who  creates 
knows,  surely  the  One  who  knows  will  speak.  Since  He  will  speak,  surely  He  will 
speak to those who possess consciousness and thought, and those who will understand 
His speech. Since He will speak to those who possess thought, surely he will speak to 
mankind, whose nature and awareness are the most comprehensive of all con 

 

115

scious  beings.  Since  He  will  speak  to  mankind,  surely  He  will  speak  to  the  most 
perfect of  mankind  and  those  most  worthy  of  address.  Since  He  will  speak  to  those 
who are most perfect, most worthy of address, highest in morality, and who will guide 
humanity; He will certainly speak to Muhammad, who, as friend and foe alike testify, 
is of the highest disposition and morality, who is obeyed by one fifth of humanity, to 
whose spiritual rule half of the globe has submitted, with the radiance of whose light 
the  future  of  mankind  has  been  illumined  for  thirteen  centuries,  to  whom  the 
believers,  the  luminous  segment  of  humanity,  renew  five  times  daily  the  oath  of 
allegiance, for whose happiness they pray, for whom they call down God’s blessings 
and bear admiration and love in their hearts. Certainly, He will speak to Muhammad 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) and indeed He has done; He will make him the 
Prophet,  and  indeed  He  has  done;  He  will  make  him  the  guide  for  the  rest  of 
humanity, and indeed He has done. 

SECOND SIGN 

God’s Most Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) declared his 
prophethood,  and  presented  to  humanity  such  a  decree  as  the  Qur’an  of  Mighty 
Stature  and  such  manifest  miracles  as  number,  according  to  the  scholars,  one 
thousand.2 The occurrence of those miracles  in their entirety  is as certain as the  fact 
that  he  declared  himself  prophet.  In  fact,  as  is  shown  by  the  words  of  the  most 
obstinate  unbelievers  quoted  in  various  places  of  the  Wise  Qur’an, even  they could 
not  deny  his  miracles  so  called  them  –  God  forbid!  –  sorcery,  in  order  to  satisfy 
themselves or to deceive their followers. 

The  miracles  of  Muhammad  (UWBP)  have  the  certainty  of  confirmation  by 
consensus to the hundredth degree. The miracle is the confirmation by the Creator of 
the  cosmos  of  his  declaration  of  prophethood;  it  has  the  effect  of  the  words,  “You 
have  spoken  truly!”  Suppose  that  you  said  in  the  assembly  of  a  ruler,  while  being 
observed by  him, “The ruler has appointed me to such-and-such a position.” Should 
you be asked for a proof of your claim, the word “Yes” uttered by the ruler would be 
sufficient  to  support  you.  Or,  if  the  ruler  changed  his  usual  practice  and  attitude  at 
your request, this would confirm  your claim even more soundly and more definitely 
than would the word “Yes.” 

In  the  same  way,  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace) 
claimed:  “I  am  the  envoy  of  the  Creator  of  the  universe.  My  proof  is  that  He  will 
change His unbroken order at my request and my prayer. Now  

                                                 
2 al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari, vi, 454; Nawawi, Sharh Sahih Muslim, i, 2. 

 

116

look at my  fingers: He causes them to run like a fountain with five spigots. Look at 
the moon: by a gesture of my finger, He splits it in two. Look at that tree: to affirm me 
and to bear witness to me, it moves and comes near to me. Look at this food: although 
it  is  barely  enough  for  two  or  three  men,  it  satisfies  two  or  three  hundred.”  He 
demonstrated too hundreds of similar miracles. 

However,  the  evidences  of  this  person’s  veracity  and  the  proofs  of  his 
prophethood are not restricted to his miracles. All  his deeds and acts, his words and 
behaviour, his moral conduct and manners, his character and appearance prove to the 
attentive  his truthfulness and seriousness. Indeed, many people such as ‘Abdullah b. 
Salam, the famous scholar of the Children of Israel, came to believe merely by seeing 
him, and said: “No lie can hide in this face, nor fraud be found in it!”3 

Although many scholars who have researched the matter have concluded that the 
proofs  of  Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  prophethood  and  his  miracles  number  about  one 
thousand,  there  are  thousands,  perhaps  hundreds  of  thousands,  of  proofs  of  his 
prophethood. And hundreds of thousands of men with varying opinions have affirmed 
it in an equal number of ways. The Wise Qur’an alone demonstrates a thousand of the 
proofs of his prophethood, in addition to its own forty aspects of miraculousness. 

Since prophethood is a phenomenon of humanity, and hundreds of thousands of 
persons  who  claimed  prophethood  and  performed  miracles  have  lived  and  passed 
away,4 of a certainty Muhammad’s (UWBP) prophethood is superior to all the others. 
For  whatever  evidences,  qualities,  and  attributes  made  prophets  such  as  Jesus  and 
Moses  (Upon  whom  be  peace)  be  known  as  prophets  and  were  the  means  of  their 
messengership, they were all possessed in a more perfect and comprehensive fashion 
by  Muhammad  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace).  And  since  the  causes  and 
means of prophetic authority were more perfectly present in the person of Muhammad 
(UWBP),  this  authority  was  to  be  found  in  him  with  more  certainty  than  in  all  the 
others. 

THIRD SIGN 

The miracles of the Most Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) 

were extremely varied. Since his messengership was universal,  

                                                 
3 Tirmidhi, Qiyama, 42; Ibn Maja, Iqama, 174; Atima, 1; Darimi, Salat, 156; Isti’dhan, 4; Musnad, v, 
451. 
4 Musnad, v, 266; Waliyyuddin Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih, iii, 122; Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawzi, Zad al-
Ma’ad (Tahqiq: al-Arnavud), i, 43-44. 

 

117

he was distinguished by miracles that related to almost all species of creation. Just as 
the supreme lieutenant of a renowned ruler, arriving with many gifts in a city where 
various  peoples  live,  will  be  welcomed  by  a  representative  of  each  people  who 
acclaims him and bids him welcome in his own language; so too, when the supreme 
Lieutenant of the Monarch of Pre-Eternity and Post-Eternity honoured the universe by 
coming as an envoy to the inhabitants of the earth, and brought with him the light of 
truth and spiritual gifts sent by the Creator of the universe, which were connected to 
the truths of the whole universe, each species of  creation – from water, rocks, trees, 
animals  and human beings to the moon, the sun  and the stars – each welcomed him 
and acclaimed his prophethood, each in its own language and each bearing one of his 
miracles. 

Now  it  would  require  a  voluminous  work  to  mention  all  his  miracles.  As 
punctilious, investigating scholars have written many volumes concerning the proofs 
of  his  prophethood,  here  we  will  briefly  point  out  only  the  general  categories  into 
which  fall  miracles  about  which  there  are  unanimous  reports,  both  definite  and  in 
meaning (kat’î ve manevî mütevatir).5  

The  evidences  of  Muhammad’s  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace) 

prophethood fall into two main categories:  

T h e  F i r s t  is called irhasat and includes the paranormal events that happened 

at the time of his birth or before his prophetic mission.  

T  h  e    S  e  c  o  n  d    group  pertains  to  all  the  remaining  evidences  of  his 

prophethood, and contains two subdivisions:  

The  first  are  those  wonders  that  were  manifested  after  his  departure  from  this 
world  in  order  to  confirm  his  prophethood,  and  the second,  those that  he  exhibited 
during the era of his prophethood. The latter has also two parts:  

The  first,  the  evidences  of  his  prophethood  that  became  manifest  in  his  own 
personality,  his  inner  and  outer  being,  his  moral  conduct  and  perfections,  and  the 
second,  the  miracles  manifested  in  the  outer  world.  The  last  part  again  has  two 
branches: 

One, those concerning the Qur’an and spirituality, and the other, those relating 

to materiality and the universe. This last branch is again divided into two categories:  

The  first  involves  the  paranormal  happenings  that  occurred  during  his  mission 
either  to  break  the  stubbornness  of  the  unbelievers,  or  to  augment  the  faith  of  the 
believers. This category has twenty different sorts, such as  

                                                 
5 For consensus in this sense (T. tevatür; Ar. tawatur), see, fn. 8 below. (Tr.) 

 

118

the splitting of the moon, the flowing of water from his fingers, the satisfying of large 
numbers with a little food, and the speaking of trees, rocks and animals. Each of these 
sorts also has many instances, and thus has, in meaning, the strength of confirmation 
by consensus (manevî tevatür). As for the second category, this includes events lying 
in the future that occurred as he  had predicted, on God’s instructions. Now, starting 
from the last category, we will summarize a list of them.6 

FOURTH SIGN 

There  is  no  limit  to  the  reports  God’s  Most  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings and peace) gave concerning the  Unseen through the instruction of the One 
All-Knowing of the Unseen. As we have mentioned the types of these reports in the 
Twenty-Fifth Word, which is about the miraculousness of the Qur’an, and to a degree 
explained  and  proved  them,  we  now  refer  to  that  Word  the  explanation  of  the 
information he gave concerning the Unseen about past times and prophets, as well as 
truths  concerning  the  Godhead,  the  universe,  and  the  hereafter, and  will  point  out  a 
few  of  his  many  correct  predictions  about  his  Companions,  his  Family  and  his 
community.  But  first,  for  a  complete  understanding  of  the  subject,  we  will  state  six 
principles by way of an introduction. 

First Principle 

All  the  states  and  acts  of  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and 
peace)  testified  to  his  veracity  and  prophethood,  but  not  all  of  them  had  to  be 
miraculous.  For  God  Almighty  sent  him  in  the  form  of  a  human  being  so  that  he 
might be a guide and leader to human beings in their social affairs, and in the acts and 
deeds by means of which they attain happiness in this world and the next; and so that 
he  might  disclose  to  human  beings  the  wonders  of  His  art  and  His  disposive  power 
that  underlie  all  occurrences  and  are  in  appearance  customary,  but  in  reality  are 
miracles of divine power. If, then, he had abandoned the human state in his acts and 
become  extra-ordinary  in  all  aspects,  he  could  not  have  been  a  leader,  or  have 
instructed human beings with his acts, states, and conduct. He was, indeed, honoured 
with  paranormal  phenomena  in  order  to  prove  his  prophethood  to  obstinate 
unbelievers,  and  from  time  to  time  performed  miracles  as  the  need  arose.  But  as 
required by the examinations and trials that man is set, his miracles never occurred so 
obviously as to compel everyone to believe, whether willingly or unwillingly. For the 
wisdom in man’s trial  

                                                 
6 Unfortunately, I could not write as I had intended. Without choice, I wrote as my heart dictated, and I 
could not completely conform to the order of this classification. 

 

119

and accountability  necessitates that the way be shown to him without depriving him 
of his will; the door has to be opened to his intelligence without snatching its freedom 
from  its  hand.  If  the  Messenger’s  (UWBP)  miracles  had  occurred  in  so  apparent  a 
way,  intelligence  would  have  had  no  choice;  Abu  Jahl  would  have  believed  as  did 
Abu Bakr; coal would have had the  value of diamonds, and no purpose would have 
remained for testing and accountability. 

It  is  a  source  of  amazement  that  while  thousands  of  men  of  different  character 
came  to  believe  through  observing  a  single  of  his  miracles,  a  single  proof  of  his 
prophethood, or a word of his, or through merely seeing his face, some wretches are 
nowadays  going  astray  as  if  those  thousands  of  proofs  of  his  prophethood were  not 
sufficient  evidence,  although  they  have  come  down  to  us  through  authentic 
transmission  and  with  certain  proofs,  and  have  caused  many  thousands  of  exacting 
scholars and thinkers and different men to accept faith. 

Second Principle 

God’s Most Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) was a human 
being; hence he acted like a human being. He was also a messenger and prophet, and 
with  regard  to  his  messengership,  he  was  an  interpreter  and  an  envoy  of  Almighty 
God. His messengership was based upon revelation (vahy), which is of two kinds: 

The First is explicit revelation. In this case, the Noble Messenger (Upon whom 
be blessings and peace) is merely an interpreter and announcer, with no share in the 
content. The Qur’an and some sacred Hadith (Hadith Qudsi) are included in this kind 
of revelation. 

The Second is implicit revelation. The essence and gist of this is also based on 
revelation  or  inspiration,  but  its  explanation  and  description  were  left  to  the 
Messenger (UWBP). When he explained and described such revelation, sometimes he 
again  relied  on  revelation,  or on  inspiration,  or  sometimes  he  spoke  in  terms  of  his 
own  insight.  When  he  resorted  to  his  own  interpretation,  he  either  relied  on  the 
perceptive  power  given  him  on  account  of  his  prophetic  mission,  or  he  spoke  as  a 
human  being  and  conformably  to  usage,  custom  and  the  level  of  common 
comprehension. 

Thus,  all  the  details  of  every  Hadith  were  not  necessarily  derived  from  pure 
revelation,  nor  should the  lofty  marks  of  messengership  be  sought  in  such  thoughts 
and transactions of his as were required by his participation in the human state. Since 
some  truths  were  revealed  to  him  in  a  brief  and  abstract  form,  and  he  himself 
described them in the  light of  his  insight  and according to common comprehension, 
the metaphors and allusions in his  

 

120

descriptions  sometimes  may  need  explanation,  or  even  interpretation.  There  are, 
indeed, some truths that the human mind can grasp only by way of comparison. For 
example,  once  in the  presence  of  the  Prophet  (UWBP),  a  loud  noise  was  heard.  He 
said, “This is the noise of a rock that has been rolling down for seventy years and has 
now reached the lowest depths of Hell.”7 An hour later the news came that a famous 
dissembler who had recently turned seventy years old had died and gone to Hell, thus 
explaining the event Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings and peace) had described 
by means of an eloquent comparison. 

Third Principle 

If there is a consensus of opinion concerning any related tradition (Turk. tevatür; 
Ar. tawatur),8 it is indisputable. There are two kinds of this sort of report: one is those 
reports  about  which  there  is  ‘a  clear,  unambiguous  consensus  (sarih  tevatür),’  the 
other is ‘consensus in meaning (manevî tevatür).’ The latter is also of two kinds: the 
first  includes  those  concerning  which  the  consensus  is  implied  by  silence.  For 
example, if a man in a community relates an incident in front of his people and those 
listening  do  not  contradict  him,  that  is,  they  respond  to  him  by  keeping  silent,  this 
implies their acceptance of the report. In particular, if that community is such as will 
not accept any  error, will consider any  lie reprehensible, is ready to criticize and, in 
addition, shows an interest in the reported incident, its silence testifies strongly to the 
incident having occurred. 

The second kind of ‘consensus  in meaning’ is that which occurs when different 
people relate  a  particular  incident,  for  example,  one  okka9  of  food  fed  two  hundred 
people,  in  different  versions:  one  person  describes  in  one  way,  another  in  another 
way,  and  another  in  yet  another  way,  but  all  are  unanimously  agreed  on  the 
occurrence of the incident. Thus, its certain occurrence is supported by ‘consensus in 
meaning’ and is definite; its actual occurrence is not harmed by differences in detail. 
Apart from this, there are times when a report supplied by a single person expresses 
the certainty of ‘consensus,’ under certain conditions. It also sometimes happens that 
single report expresses certainity when supported by other, outside evidences.  
Most of the reports concerning the miracles and evidences of the Noble  

                                                 
7 Muslim, Janna, 31; Musnad, iii, 341, 346. 
8 Tawatur is the kind of report that is transmitted by numerous authorities and about which there is no 
room for doubt, that is, a report concerning which there is a consensus of opinion. (Tr.) 
9 One okka was the equivalent of 2.8 lbs. or 1,3000 gr. (Tr.) 

 

121

Messenger’s (Upon whom be blessings and peace) prophethood that have come down 
to  us  are  either  of  the  category  of  ‘clear  consensus,’  or  ‘consensus  in  meaning,’  or 
‘consensus  implied  by  silence.’  As  for  the  others,  although  they  are  the  report  of  a 
single person, they also have the certainty of ‘consensus’ since they have received the 
acceptance  of  the  meticulous  authorities  on  Hadith.  Of  such  meticulous  authorities 
were those geniuses who were called al-Hafiz, who had committed to memory at least 
100,000 Hadiths, who offered for fifty years their morning prayer with the ablution of 
the night prayer, and who produced the six accurate books of Hadith headed by those 
of Bukhari and Muslim. Without doubt, any report scrutinized and accepted by them 
cannot fall short of the certainty of ‘consensus.’ For they acquired such intimacy with 
the Noble Messenger’s (Upon whom be blessings and peace) Hadiths and became so 
familiar with  his exalted style and manner that they could spot at first sight a  single 
false Hadith among a hundred reports, and would reject it, saying, “This cannot be a 
prophetic tradition; it does not have his wording.” Since they were able to recognize 
the precious quality of the Hadith, like an expert jeweller, there was no possibility of 
their  confusing  any  other  word  with  that  of  the  Messenger  (UWBP).  Some 
researchers,  however,  such  as  Ibn  al-Jawzi,  went  to  such  excesses  in  their  criticism 
that they regarded many accurate traditions as false. Nevertheless, this does not mean 
that every false wording is wrong in meaning, but that the wording itself is not that of 
the Messenger (UWBP). 

Q u e s t i o n : What is the use of citing the chain of transmission of a tradition 
so that even if it is not called for in the case of a well-known incident they say: “So-
and-so informed so-and-so, etc.”? 

A n s w e  r :  Its uses  and benefits are many; one  is that the  citing of the chain 
shows the concurrence of the truthful, reliable and exacting scholars of Hadith and the 
unanimity  of  the  discerning  authorities  whose  names  are  included;  each  of  the 
scholars and authorities endorses the accuracy of the tradition, and places his seal and 
signature on it. 

Q  u  e  s  t  i  o  n  :  Why  were  the  miraculous  events  not  transmitted  through 
numerous  chains  concerning  which  there  was  a  consensus  of  opinion  and  with  as 
great emphasis as the basic injunctions of the Sacred Law, the Shari‘a? 

A n s w e r : Because the majority of the injunctions of the Shari‘a are needed by 
most  people  at  most  times,  for  they  all  are  applicable  to  each  person,  like  an 
obligation incumbent on all. But not everyone needs to know of every miracle; even if 
he does, it suffices him to hear it only once. It is, in fact, like the kind of obligation 
the observance of which by some  

 

122

will absolve the rest;  it  is quite enough  for miracles to be known only to some. For 
this reason, even if the occurrence and reality of a miracle ten times more certain than 
that  of  an  injunction  of  the  Shari‘a,  it  will  still  come  to  us  through  one  or  two 
narrators, whereas the injunction is narrated by ten or twenty persons. 

Fourth Principle 

The future events that the Most Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and 
peace) predicted were not isolated incidents; he rather predicted general and recurring 
events in a particular way. Those events, however, had many sides to them and each 
time  he  mentioned  them,  he  explained  a  different  side.  Then  the  narrator  of  the 
Hadiths  combined  all  of  those  sides  and  they  sometimes  appear  contrary  to  reality. 
There are, for example, varying narrations concerning the Mahdi, each with different 
details and descriptions. However, as was explained in a section of the Twenty-Fourth 
Word,  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom be blessings  and  peace)  gave  the  tidings, 
relying on revelation, of a Mahdi who would come in every century to preserve the 
morale of the believers, help them not to fall into despair in the face of disasters, and 
link the hearts of the believers with the people of the Prophet’s (UWBP) Family, who 
constitute a luminous line in the world of Islam. Every century has seen a Mahdi from 
the Prophet’s (UWBP) Family, or several, similar to the Great Mahdi who is promised 
to come at the end of time. One of the ‘Abbasid Caliphs even, who were said to be 
descendants of the Prophet’s (UWBP) Family, was a Mahdi who possessed many of 
the  Great  Mahdi’s  characteristics.  In  this  way  the  attributes of  the  Mahdi’s  deputies 
and of the spiritual poles who were Mahdis who were to precede the Great Mahdi and 
were samples and forerunners of him, were confused with the attributes of the Great 
Mahdi  himself,  and  the  narrations  concerning  him  were  seen  to  conflict  with  one 
another. 

Fifth Principle 

Since “None knows the Unseen save God,”10 the Noble Messenger (Upon whom 
be blessings and peace) could not know  it  himself. God Almighty communicated to 
him the tidings of the Unseen, and he made them known. And since God Almighty is 
All-Wise and Compassionate, His wisdom and mercy require that most of the matters 
of the Unseen be veiled or obscure. For in this world, events disagreeable to human 
beings are numerous; prior knowledge of their happening would be painful. It is  

                                                 
10 Qur’an, 27:65. See also, Tirmidhi, Thawab al-Qur’an, 7; Darimi, Fada’il al-Qur’an, 21. 

 

123

for  this  reason  that  death  and  the  appointed  hour  of  death  are  left  obscure,  and  the 
calamities that are to befall human beings remain behind the veil of the Unseen.  

Again, as a result of His wisdom and mercy, God Almighty did not entirely or in 
detail inform His Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) about the dreadful 
events that would befall his Family and Companions after his demise, in order not to 
hurt his extremely tender compassion for his community and his firm affection for his 
Family.11  For  certain  divine  purposes,  He  made  some  of  these  significant  events 
known  to  him,  but  not  in  all  their  awesomeness.  As  for  pleasant  events,  He 
communicated them to the Messenger (UWBP) sometimes in outline and sometimes 
in detail, and the Messenger (UWBP) in turn made them known to his Companions. 
Thus those tidings were accurately  transmitted to us by the scholars of  Hadith, who 
were  at  the  height  of  piety,  justice,  and  truthfulness,  and  who  feared  very  much  the 
warning of the Hadith, “Whoever knowingly tells a lie concerning me should prepare 
for a seat in Hell,”12 and that of the Qur’anic verse, “Who, then does more wrong than 
the one who utters lie concerning God?”(39:32) 

Sixth Principle 

Although some qualities and aspects of the Most Noble Messenger (UWBP) have 
been described in books of history and biography, most of those qualities relate to his 
humanness.  But  in  reality,  the  spiritual  personality  and  the  sacred  nature  of  that 
blessed person were so exalted and luminous that the qualities described in books fall 
short  of  his  high  stature.  For  according  to  the  rule,  “The  cause  is  like  the  doer,” 
everyday,  even  at  this  moment,  the  amount  of  the  worship  performed  by  all  his 
community  is  being  added  to  the record  of  his perfections.  He  is  also  everyday  the 
object of the countless supplications of his  vast community,  in addition to being the 
object of infinite divine mercy  in an  infinite  fashion and with an infinite capacity to 
receive. He was, indeed, the result and the most perfect fruit of  

                                                 
11 For example, he was not made to know about ‘A’isha’s taking part in the Battle of the Camel so that 
his deep love and affection toward her (May God be pleased with her) would not be hurt. He said, in 
fact, to his wives: “I wish I knew which one of you will be involved in that incident.” Later he was 
apparently made aware of it to a slightly greater extent, as he once said to ‘Ali (May God be pleased 
with him): “Some event will take place between you and ‘A’isha.”* 
* Musnad, vi, 393; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, vi, 410; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, vii, 234. 
12 Bukhari, ‘Ilm, 38; Jana’iz, 33; Anbiya’, 50; Adab 109; Muslim, Zuhd, 72; Abu Da’ud, ‘Ilm, 4; 
Tirmidhi, Fitan, 70; ‘Ilm, 8, 13; Tafsir, 1; Manaqib, 19; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 4; Darimi, Muqaddima, 
25, 46; Musnad, i, 70, 78; ii, 159, 171; iii, 13, 44; iv, 47, 100; v, 292. 

 

124

the universe, the interpreter and the beloved of the Creator of the cosmos. Hence his 
true nature in its entirety, and the truth of all his perfections, cannot be contained in 
the human qualities recorded in books of history and biography. Certainly, the stature 
of a blessed person with the Archangels Gabriel and Michael as two aides-de-camp at 
his side in the Battle of Badr,13 is not to be found in the form of a person bargaining 
with a beduin in the marketplace over the price of a horse, bringing forth Khuzayma 
as his sole witness.14 

In  order  not  to proceed  in  error, one  should  raise  his  head  beyond  the  ordinary 
qualities of the Prophet (UWBP) that pertain to his participation  in the  human state, 
and  behold  instead  his  true  nature  and  luminous  stature  that  pertain  to  the  rank  of 
messengership.  Otherwise,  one  will  either  show  him  irreverence,  or  instil  doubts  in 
oneself. Listen to the following comparison for an understanding of this mystery. 

Suppose  that  a  date  seed  was  planted  in  the  earth,  has  sprouted  and  become  a 
large,  fruit-bearing  tree,  and  is  still  continuing  to  grow  taller  and  broader.  Or  that  a 
peahen’s  egg  was  incubated,  a  chick  was  hatched  from  it  and  became  a  beautifully 
adorned peacock gilded all over with the imprint of power, and is still growing bigger 
and  more  beautiful.  Now,  there  exist  qualities,  properties  and  precisely  balanced 
elements that belong to the seed and the egg, but are  not as great  and significant  as 
those  of  the  tree  and  the  bird  that  emerge  from  them.  So,  while  describing  the 
qualities  of  the  tree  and  the  bird  together  with  those  of  the  seed  and  the  egg,  one 
should turn one’s attention from the seed to the tree, and from the egg to the bird, so 
that  one’s  reason  may  find  the  description  acceptable.  Otherwise,  if  you  claim:  “I 
have obtained thousands of dates from a seed,” or, “This egg is the king of all birds,” 
you will invite others to contradict and deny your words. 

The  humanness of God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) may 
be likened to the seed or egg, and his essential nature, illumined with the function of 
messengership, to the Tuba-tree of Paradise, or to the birds of Paradise. His essential 
nature is, moreover, continually moving to greater perfection. That is why, when you 
think of the man who disputed in the market with a beduin, you should also turn the 
eye  of  imagination  to  that  luminous  being  who,  riding  the  Rafraf,  leaving  Gabriel 
behind, reached the “distance of two bowstrings.”(53:9) Otherwise you will either be 
disrespectful toward him, or fail to convince the evil-commanding soul. 

                                                 
13 Bukhari, , 11; Ahmad al-Banna al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-Rabbani, xxi, 26. 
14 Abu Da’ud, ‘Aqdiyya, 20; Musnad, v, 215. 

 

125

FIFTH SIGN 

Unseen. 

We will cite in this Sign a few examples of Hadiths concerning the matters of the 

It has come down to us through a chain of transmission the authenticity of which 
is  agreed  upon  (tevatür)  that  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and 
peace)  declared  from  the  pulpit  in  the  presence  of  his  Companions:  “This  my 
grandson Hasan is a master of men by means of whom God will reconcile two great 
groups.”15  Forty  years  later,  when  the  two  largest  armies  of  Islam  met  each  other, 
Hasan  made  peace  with  Mu‘awiya,  and  thus  fulfilled  the  prophecy  of  his  noble 
grandfather (UWBP). 

According  to  another  authentic  narration,  the  Messenger  (UWBP)  said  to  ‘Ali: 
“You will fight the perfidious, the just, and the deviator,”16 thus predicting the battles 
of the Camel and Siffin, and that fought against the Kharijites. 

He  again  said  to ‘Ali,  when  he  was  displaying  love  for  Zubayr:  “He  will  fight 

against you, but will be in the wrong.”17 

He also said to his wives: “One among you will take charge of a rebellion; many 

around her will be killed;”18 “and the dogs will bark all around her.”19 

All  these  certain  and  authentic  traditions  are  the  proven  predictions  of  the 
struggles  of  ‘Ali  against  ‘A’isha,  Zubayr  and  Talha  during  the  Battle  of  the  Camel, 
against Mu‘awiya at Siffin, and against the Kharijites at Harawra’ and Nahrawan. 

The Messenger (UWBP) also informed ‘Ali about a man who would stain ‘Ali’s 
beard with the blood of his own head.20 ‘Ali knew the man; it was ‘Abd al-Rahman b. 
Muljam the Kharijite. 

He also mentioned a man marked with a peculiar sign, Dhu’l-Thudia. When the 
man was found among the dead of the Kharijites, ‘Ali showed him as a proof of the 
rightness  of  his  cause,  announcing  at  the  same  time  the  miracle  of  the  Prophet 
(UWBP).21 

                                                 
15 Bukhari, Fitan, 20; Sulh, 9; Fada’il Ashab al-Nabi, 22; Manaqib, 25; Darimi, Sunna, 12; Tirmidhi, 
Manaqib, 25; Nasa’i, Jum’a, 27; Musnad, v, 38, 44, 49, 51. 
16 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 139, 140; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, vii, 138; Bayhaqi, Dala’il 
al-Nubuwwa, vi, 414. 
17 Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, vi, 213; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 366, 367; ‘Ali al-Qari, 
Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 686, 687. 
18 al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari, xiii, 45. 
19 Musnad vi, 52, 97; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, viii, 258 no: 6697; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 120. 
20 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 113; Musnad, i, 102, 103, 148, 156. 
21 Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; Adab, 95; Istitaba, 7; Muslim, Zakat, 148, 156, 157; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 28; 
Musnad, iii, 56, 65. 

 

126

According to another authentic tradition related by Umm Salama and others, the 
Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  also  predicted  that  Husain 
would be  killed  at  Taff  (Karbala).22  Fifty  years  later  the  painful  event  took place  as 
predicted. 

He also repeatedly predicted that after his demise, his Family would face death, 
calamities, and exile, and gave some details.23 What he had predicted later came true 
exactly. 

In this connection, a question may be asked: although ‘Ali, with his extraordinary 
bravery  and  profound  knowledge  in  addition  to  his  kinship  to  God’s  Messenger 
(UWBP), greatly deserved to be Caliph, why did he not precede the others in holding 
the caliphate, and why did Islam experience such disorder during his caliphate? 

A  n  s  w  e  r  :  A  supreme  spiritual  pole  from  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  Family  is 
reported as having said: “The Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) 
had desired that ‘Ali be Caliph, but it was made known to him from the Unseen that 
the  will  of  God  Almighty  was  different.  He  then  abandoned  his  desire,  submitting 
himself to God’s will.”24 

One  of  the  reasons  God’s  will  was  different  could  have  been  that  after  the 
Prophet’s  (UWBP)  demise  when  the  Companions  were  more  than  ever  in  need  of 
alliance  and  unity,  if  ‘Ali  had  taken  the  leadership  it  would  most  probably  have 
aroused  in  many  persons  and  tribes  a  tendency  to  compete,  because  of  his 
uncompromising nature, and fearless, ascetic, heroic, and independent character, and 
widely known courage – as was the case during his caliphate –  and divisions among 
the believers would have resulted. 

Another reason for the delay of ‘Ali’s caliphate was the following: at the time of 
his  caliphate,  the  Muslim  community,  which  had  expanded  rapidly  through  the 
intermingling  of  many  tribes  and  peoples,  possessed  such  traits  as  reflected  the 
opinions of the seventy-three sects that the Noble Messenger (UWBP) had predicted 
would evolve in due time.25 Therefore, in the face of such disturbances, someone was 
needed with the wondrous strength, courage, respectability and sagacity of ‘Ali, who 
had  behind  him  the  force  of  the  respected  Hashimites  and  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP) 
Family,  so  that  he  could  resist  the  sedition.  And  indeed  he  did  so,  in  a  fashion 
conformable to the prediction of the Prophet, who had said to him: “I have  

                                                 
22 al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 188; Musnad, vi, 294. 
23 Ibn Maja, Fitan, 34. 
24 Daylami, Musnad al-Firdaws, v, 316; Suyuti, Tarikhal-Khulafa’, 64. 
25 Tirmidhi, Iman, 18; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 1; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 17; Darimi, 75. 

 

127

fought for the revelation of the Qur’an; you will fight for its interpretation.”26 

A  further  reason  for  this  delay  was  that  without  ‘Ali,  worldly  rule  would  most 
probably  have  caused  the  Umayyad  kings  to  go  completely  astray.  However,  being 
confronted with  ‘Ali  and  the  Prophet’s  Family,  and  having  to  appear  equal  to  them 
and  to  preserve  their  prestige  before  the  Muslims,  all  the  leaders  of  the  Umayyad 
dynasty,  even  if  not  they  themselves,  in  any  event  due  to  their  encouragement  and 
recommendations,  their  followers  and  supporters,  worked  with  all  their  strength  to 
preserve  and  disseminate  the  truths  of  Islam  and  belief  and  the  Qur’anic  decrees. 
Thus, they produced thousands of punctilious interpreters of the Law, and authorities 
on  Hadith,  and  saints  and  purified  scholars.  Had  they  not  been  faced  by  the  strong 
religiosity, sainthood, and virtuousness of ‘Ali and of the Prophet’s (UWBP) Family, 
it  is possible that the  Umayyads would have gone completely astray as happened at 
the end of their rule, and as did the ‘Abbasids. 

I t  m i g h t  a l s o  b e  a s k e d :  “Why did the Islamic caliphate not remain in 

the Prophet’s (UWBP) Family, since they were the most deserving and fitted for it?” 

T h e  A n s w e r : Worldly rule is deceptive, and the Prophet’s (UWBP) Family 
had been appointed to preserve the decrees of the Qur’an and the truths of Islam. Not 
to be deceived by power, the one who was to hold it and the caliphate  had to be as 
sinless  as  a  prophet,  or  as  purehearted  and  unworldly  as  the  Four-Rightly  Guided 
Caliphs, ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz or the Mahdi of the ‘Abbasids. In fact, the caliphate 
of  the  Fatimid  dynasty,  which  was  founded  in  the  name  of  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP) 
Family in Egypt, and the rule of the Almohads in Africa, and the Safavid dynasty in 
Iran showed that worldly rule was not suitable for the Prophet’s (UWBP) Family, for 
it caused them to neglect their primary duty, the protection of religion and the service 
of Islam. When, on the other hand, they gave up worldly rule, they served Islam and 
the Qur’an brilliantly and successfully. 

Now  see:  of  the  poles  of  sainthood  descended  from  Hasan,  especially  the  Four 
Poles27 and above all ‘Abd al-Qadir Gilani, and the Imams of Husain’s line, especially 
Zayn  al-‘Abidin  and  Ja‘far  al-Sadiq,  each  became  like  a  spiritual  Mahdi,  dispelled 
wrongdoing and spiritual darkness, and  

                                                 
26 -Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, vi, 244; Musnad, iii, 31, 33, 82; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, ix, 46 no: 6898.. 
27 The “four poles of sainthood,” namely, ‘Abd al-Qadir Gilani, Ahmad Rufa’i, Ahmad Badawi, and 
Ibrahim Dasuqi. (Tr.) 

 

128

spread the light of the Qur’an and the truths of belief. In so doing each showed that he 
was a true heir of his noble forefather. 

I t  m a y  t h e n  b e  a s k e d :  “What was the wisdom in the awesome and 
bloody  dissension  that  was  visited  on  blessed  Islam  and  the luminous  Age  of  Bliss, 
and what aspect of mercy was there in it, for they did not deserve such distress? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  Just  as  a  heavy  spring  rainstorm  stirs  into  action  the 
potentialities  of  all  the  varieties  of  plants,  seeds,  and  trees,  and  causes  them  to 
develop, so each blossoms in its particular way and performs the duties inherent in its 
nature; so too, the dissension visited on the Companions and their successors stirred 
their potentialities into action, which were all different and like seeds; it spurred them 
on.  Exclaiming,  “Islam  is  in  danger!  Fire!  Fire!”,  it  put  fear  into  all  the  groups  and 
made  them  hasten  to  protect  Islam.  According  to  its  abilities,  each  of  the  groups 
shouldered one of the numerous different duties of the Islamic community and strove 
in  utmost  earnestness.  Some  working  for  the  preservation  of  the  prophetic  Hadiths, 
some  for  the  preservation  of  the  Shari‘a,  some  for  the  preservation  of  the  truths  of 
belief,  some  for  the  preservation  of  the  Qur’an,  and  so  on;  each  group  undertook  a 
particular duty. They strove to perform the duties of Islam. Numerous multicoloured 
flowers opened. Through the storm, seeds were cast to all the corners of the extensive 
world of Islam; half the earth was transformed into a rose-garden. But sadly, together 
with the roses, the thorns of the deviant sects appeared in the garden. 

It  was  as  if  the  Hand  of  Power  had  shaken  that  era  in  wrath,  rotated  it  with 
intense vigour, and electrified the men of zeal. Through the centrifugal force of that 
movement,  a  great  many  enlightened  interpreters  of  the  Law,  luminous  scholars  of 
Hadith,  holy memorizers of the Qur’an, gifted scholars, men of purity, and poles of 
sainthood were flung off and caused to emigrate to the remote corners of the world of 
Islam.  It  fired  with  enthusiasm  all  the  people  of  Islam  from  East  to  West  and 
awakened them to the treasures of the Qur’an. Now we return to our subject. 

There  are  thousands  of  events  that  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace)  predicted  and  that  happened  as  he  foretold.  Here  we  shall 
mention a few of them. The majority of those we will cite are agreed upon by the six 
well-known, most authentic books of Hadith, particularly Bukhari and Muslim. There 
is a ‘consensus in meaning’ concerning the reports, while others, on account of being 
verified by meticulous researchers, may also be considered to have this certainty. 

According  to  an  authentic  and  certain  narration,  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon 

whom be blessings and peace) said to his Companions: “You will be  

 

129

victorious over all your enemies, will succeed in the conquest of Mecca,28 Khaybar,29 
Damascus  and  Iraq,30  Persia,  and  Jerusalem,31  and  will  share  among  yourselves  the 
treasures of the rulers of the greatest empires, the Byzantines and the Persians.”32 He 
did not say this as a matter of conjecture or personal opinion; he said it as if he had 
seen it, and what he said came true as predicted. This was despite the fact that at the 
time he foretold it he had to migrate to Medina with a handful of followers, with the 
rest of the world, including the environs of Medina, hostile to him! 

He  also  repeatedly  declared,  according  to  authentic  and  certain  narrations,  that 
Abu Bakr and ‘Umar would outlive  him and be his  Caliphs, that they would act for 
God’s sake and within the bounds of God’s pleasure and that of the Prophet (UWBP), 
that  Abu  Bakr’s  rule  would  be  short,  and  that  ‘Umar  would  remain  a  long  time  to 
succeed in many conquests. Thus he said: “Incumbent upon you is following the path 
of those who come after me, Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.”33 

He also declared: “The earth was laid out before me, and its eastern and western 
extremities  were  displayed  to  me;  the  realm  of  my  community  shall  extend  over 
whatever was laid out before me.”34 And his words proved to be true. 

According  to  an  authentic  and  certain  narration,  before  the  Battle  of  Badr,  he 
pointed out one by one the places where the leaders of the Quraysh would be killed, 
saying: “Abu Jahl will be killed here, ‘Utba here, Umayya here, etc.,”35 and added, “I 
shall  kill  ‘Ubayy  b.  Khalaf  with  my  own  hands.”36  His  predictions  all  proved  to be 
true. 

Again,  according  to  an  authentic  and  certain  narration,  he  informed  his 
Companions  about  what  was  happening  in  the  celebrated  Battle  of  Mu’ta,  near 
Damascus – at a distance of one month’s journey from where he was – as if he were 
seeing  his  Companions  fighting  in  the  battle,  and  said:  “Zayd  has  taken  the  banner 
and been struck;  now Ibn Rawaha has taken the  banner and been struck;  now Ja‘far 
has taken the banner and been struck; now  

                                                 
28 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh≥ al-Bukhari, i, 678, 679. 
29 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 679. 
30 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 678. 
31 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 678, 679. 
32 Bukhari, Jihad 157; Manaqib, 25; Iman, 3; Muslim, Fitan, 75, 76; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 41. 
33 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 16, 37; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 11; Musnad, v, 382, 385, 399, 402. 
34 Muslim, Fitan, 19, 20; Abu Da’ud, Fitan, 1; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 14; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 9; Musnad, iv, 123, 
278, 284. 
35 Muslim, Jihad, 83; Janna, 76; Abu Da’ud, Jihad, 115; Nasa’i, Jana’iz, 117; Musnad, i, 26; iii, 219, 
258. 
36 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 327. 

 

130

one of God’s swords [i.e. Khalid]  has taken  it.”37 Two to three weeks  later Ya‘la b. 
Munabbih returned from the battlefront. In his presence, the Noble Prophet described 
the  details  of  the  battle,  and  Ya‘la  swore  by  God  that  what  had  taken  place  at  the 
battle was exactly the same as the Bringer of Sure News (UWBP) had described.38 

According  to  an  authentic  and  certain  narration,  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon 
whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  said:  “After  me,  the  caliphate  will  last  thirty  years; 
then  it  will  be  rapacious  monarchy.”39  “The  beginning  of  this  affair  is  prophethood 
and mercy; then  it  will be mercy  and caliphate; then it will be rapacious monarchy; 
then  it  will  be  arrogance  and  tyranny.”40  He  thus  predicted  the  six-month-long 
caliphate of Hasan and the period of the Four Rightly-Guided Caliphs, and, following 
that,  the  transition  from  caliphate  to  monarchy  and  monarchy’s  being  plagued  by 
intrigues and tyranny. This is exactly what later occurred. 

Again, according to an authentic narration, he declared: “‘Uthman will be killed 
while reading the Qur’an.”41 “And it may be that God will cause him to be dressed in 
a  shirt  at  that  time.  His  deposal  may  also  be  sought.”42  These  events,  too,  all  took 
place exactly as predicted. 

Also  according  to  an  authentic  narration,  while  cupping  the  Prophet  (UWBP), 
‘Abdullah b. Zubayr tasted his blessed blood. Then the Prophet (UWBP) said: “Woe 
unto the people for what shall befall them at your hands, and woe unto you for what 
shall befall  you at their  hands,”43 predicting that ‘Abdullah  would lead the Muslims 
with  extraordinary  bravery,  would  face  terrible  attacks,  and  that  because  of  him 
fearsome  events  would  befall  people.  What  he  foretold  came  about  exactly:  during 
Umayyad  rule,  ‘Abdullah  b.  Zubayr  declared  his  caliphate  in  Mecca,  heroically 
fought in many battles, until finally Hajjaj the Tyrant attacked him with a large force, 
and following a fierce battle the illustrious hero was martyred. 

Again,  according  to  an  authentic  narration,  he  foretold  the  emergence  of  the 

Umayyad dynasty44 and the tyrannical rule of many of its monarchs,  

                                                 
37 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 298; Bukhari, Maghazi, 44. 
38 al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 210; Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawzi, Zad al-Ma’ad (Tahqiq: Arnavud), iii, 
385. 
39 Musnad, v, 220, 221. 
40 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 340; Musnad, iv, 273. 
41 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 103. 
42 See, al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 100. 
43 al-‘Asqalani, al-Matalib al-‘Aliya, iv, 21; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, no: 2708; al-Hakim, al-
Mustadrak, iii, 554. 
44 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 338; ‘Ali al-Qari, i, 683; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 179. 

 

131

including  Yazid45  and  Walid,  and  Mu‘awiya’s  assuming  leadership  of  the  Muslims. 
He advised justice and gentleness, and said: “When ruling, act with forebearance.”46 
He predicted that the ‘Abbasid dynasty would emerge after the Umayyads to remain 
in power for a long time, and said: “The ‘Abbasids will come forth with black banners 
and  rule  for  much  longer  than  they  [the  Umayyads]  rule.”47  All  these  predictions 
proved to be true. 

According  to  an  authentic  narration,  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings and peace) also said: “Woe to the Arabs for the evil that has drawn near,”48 
suggesting  the  dreadful  disorders  to  be  caused  by  Jenghiz  and  Hulagu,  and  their 
destruction of the ‘Abbasid state. All this proved to be true. 

According  to  an  authentic  narration,  when  Sa‘d b.  Abi  Waqqas  was  gravely  ill, 
the Prophet (UWBP) said to him: “It may be that you will be spared so that some may 
benefit by you, and others harmed by you,”49 thus predicting that he would be a great 
commander  winning  many  victories,  and  many  peoples  would  benefit  from  him 
entering the fold of Islam, while others would be destroyed by him. His words proved 
to  be  true;  Sa‘d  led  the  Muslim  armies,  wiped  out  the  Persian  Empire,  and  caused 
many peoples to reach guidance, the path of Islam. 

Also according to an authentic narration, when the Negus, the Abyssinian ruler, 
who had accepted faith  earlier, died in the  seventh  year of the Hijra, God’s Prophet 
(Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  informed  his  Companions  about  it;  he  even 
performed  funeral  prayers  for  him.50  One  week  later  came  the  news  confirming the 
death of the Negus on the very same day as the Prophet (UWBP) had said. 

According to an authentic narration, when the Noble Prophet (UWBP) was with 
his closest four Companions on the top of Mount Uhud (or Hira), the mountain began 
to tremble. He said, “Steady! For on you are a prophet, a veracious one [siddiq], and a 
martyr,”51  and  foretold  the  martyrdom  of  ‘Umar,  ‘Uthman,  and  ‘Ali.  It  too  proved 
true. 

                                                 
45 See, al-Albani, Sahih al-Jami’ al-Saghir, no: 2579; al-Albani, Silsilat al-Ahadith al-Sahiha, no: 
1749; al-‘Asqalan, al-Matalib al-‘Aliya, no: 4528. 
46 al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, v, 186; Ibn Hajar, al-Matalib al-‘Aliya (Tahqiq: ‘Abd al-Rahman 
al-A’zami), no: 4085. 
47 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’ i, 338; Musnad, iii, 216-218; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 326. 
48 . Bukhari, Fitan, 4, 28; Muslim, Fitan, 1; Abu Da’ud, Fitan, 1; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 23; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 9; 
Musnad, ii, 390, 399; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, i, 108; iv, 439, 483. 
49 Bukhari, Jana’iz, 36; Manaqib al-Ansar, 49; Fara’id, 6; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 209; ‘Ali al-
Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 699; Abu Nu’aym, Hilyat al-Awliya, i, 94. 
50 Bukhari, Jana’iz, 57; Manaqib al-Ansar, 38; Muslim, Fara’id, 14; Abu Da’ud, Jihad, 133; Buyu’, 9; 
Tirmidhi, Jana’iz, 69; Nasa’i, Jana’iz, 66, 67; Ibn Maja, Sadaqat, 9, 13. 
51 Bukhari, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 5, 7; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 8; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 17, 18; Musnad, iii, 112; 
v, 331; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 450, 451 (two martyrs are mentioned here). 

 

132

Now,  O  unfortunate,  wretched  man  without  heart  who  says  that  Muhammad 
(UWBP) was only a clever person and then closes his eyes to that Sun of Truth! Of all 
his fifteen different kinds of miracle, you have thus far heard only a hundredth part of 
one  kind,  that  relating  to  his  predictions  which  have  the  certainty  of  ‘consensus  in 
meaning.’ To discover future events through one’s own perspicacity and thus succeed 
in even one hundredth part of the Prophet’s (UWBP) predictions, one would have to 
be of the highest genius. Even if we merely called him a genius as you call him, could 
such  a  man  have  ever  seen  anything  wrongly?  Or  could  he  have  ever  stooped  to 
reporting it wrongly? Not to heed the word of such a hundredfold genius concerning 
happiness in this world and the next is therefore the sign of a hundredfold madness! 

SIXTH SIGN 

According  to  an  authentic  narration,  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings and peace) said to Fatima: “You will be the  first of my Family to join me 
[after my death].”52 Six months later, what he said took place. 

He  also  told  Abu  Dharr:  “You  will  be  expelled  from  here  [Medina],  will  live 

alone, and will die alone.”53 All this came true twenty years later. 

Once,  as  he  awakened  in  the  house  of  Anas  b.  Malik’s  aunt,  Umm  Haram,  he 
smilingly  said:  “I  saw  my  community  waging  war  on  the  seas  like  kings  sitting  on 
thrones.”54 Umm Haram requested: “Pray that I too will be with them.” He said: “You 
shall  be.”  Forty  years  later  she  accompanied  her  husband,  ‘Ubada  b.  Samit,  on  the 
conquest of Cyprus. She died there, and her grave has ever since been visited by the 
believers. Thus, what the Messenger (UWBP) foretold proved to be true. 

Also according to an authentic narration, he declared: “From the tribe of Thaqif, a 
liar  will  claim  prophethood,  and  a  bloodthirsty  tyrant  will  appear.”55  With  this,  he 
gave  tidings  of  the  infamous  Mukhtar,  who  claimed  prophethood,  and  of  the 
barbarous Hajjaj, who killed a hundred thousand people. 

                                                 
52 Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba,101; Ibn Maja, Jana’iz, 64; Musnad, vi, 240, 282, 
283; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 340. 
53 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 345; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 343; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 700; al-
‘Asqalani, al-Matalib al-‘Aliya, iv, 116 no: 4109; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, v, 8-9; al-
‘Asqalani, al-Isaba, iv, 64. 
54 Bukhari, Ta’bir, 12; Jihad, 3, 8, 63, 75; Isti’dhan, 41; Muslim, ‘Imara, 160, 160; Abu Da’ud, Jihad, 9; 
Tirmidhi, Fada’il al-Jihad, 15; Nasa’i, Jihad, 40; Ibn Maja, Jihad, 10; Darimi, Jihad, 28; Muwatta’, 
Jihad, 39; Musnad, iii, 240, 264; al-Albani, Sahih al-Jami’ al-Saghir, vi, 24, no: 6620; al-Hakim, al-
Mustadrak, iv, 556. 
55 Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 229; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 44; Manaqib, 73; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 450; 
iv, 254. 

 

133

According  to  an  authentic  narration,  he  said:  “Istanbul  will  be  conquered,  and 
blessed  are  the  ruler and  the  toops  that  will  conquer  it.”56  He  thus  gave  tidings  that 
Istanbul  would  be  conquered  by  Muslim  hands,  and  that  Mehmed  the  Conqueror 
would attain a high spiritual rank. His prediction again proved to be true. 

He also said, according to an authentic  narration: “Were religion to be hung on 
the  Pleiades,  men  from  Persia  would  reach  up  and  lay  hold  of  it,”57  indicating  that 
matchless  scholars and saints  like Abu Hanifa  would emerge from Iran. In addition, 
he foretold Imam Shafi‘i, saying: “A scholar from Quraysh who will fill all regions of 
the earth with learning.”58 

According to an authentic narration, he said: “My community will be divided into 
seventy-three  sects,  and only  one  among  them  will  attain  salvation.”  He  was  asked: 
“Who are they?” He replied: “Those who follow me and my Companions,”59 meaning 
the Sunnis or Ahl al-Sunna wa’l-Jama‘a. 

He  also  declared:  “The  Qadariyya  are  the  Magians  of  this  community,”60 
foretelling  the  emergence  of  the  Predestinationist  (Qadariyya)  sect,  which  would be 
divided  into  different  branches  and  reject  divine  determining  or  destiny.  He  also 
foretold the Defectors (Rafida), who would produce various offshoots. 

Again according to an authentic narration, he said to ‘Ali: “As was true of Jesus, 
two groups of people will perish on your account: one because of excessive love, the 
other because of excessive enmity. Christians, on account of their deep love for Jesus, 
transgressed the  limits and called him – God forbid! – ‘the son of God,’61 while the 
Jews, because of their hostility, went to the other extreme by denying his message and 
virtue. Similarly, some will incur loss due to their exaggerated affection toward you. 
For  them  is  the  insulting  name  of  Rafida.62  And  certain  others  will  be  excessively 
hostile to you. They are the Kharijites, and the extremist partisans of the Umayyads, 
who will be called Nasiba.” 

I t  m a y  b e  a s k e d  h e r e :  Love for the Prophet’s (UWBP) Family is a 

com 

                                                 
56 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 422; Bukhari, Ta’rikh al-Saghir, no: 139; Musnad,  iv, 335; al-
Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, vi, 218. 
57 Bukhari, al-Tafsir, 62; Tirmidhi, 47; Tafsir Sura, 3. 
58 al-‘Ajluni Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 53, 54. 
59 Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 1; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 17; Tirmidhi, Iman, 18; Musnad, ii, 232; iii, 120, 148; ‘Ali al-
Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 679.   
60 al-Albani, Sahih Jami’ al-Saghir, iv, 150; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, i, 85; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 5; 
Suyuti, al-Fath al-Kabir, iii, 23; Musnad, ii, 86, 125; v, 406. 
61 Musnad, i, 160; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 133; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 123. 
62 Musnad, i, 103. 

 

134

mand  of  the  Qur’an  and  was  greatly  encouraged by  him.  The  affection of  the  Shi‘a 
may  therefore  serve  as  an  excuse  for  them,  since  deep  affection  may  be  likened  to 
intoxication.  Why,  then,  can  the  Shi‘a,  especially  the  Rafida,  not  benefit  from  their 
love, and why is their love described by the Prophet (UWBP) as transgression? 

T h e  A n s w e r :  Love is of two kinds:  
The First is to love something or someone for the meaning it or he signifies. This 
means to love ‘Ali, Hasan, Husain, and the Prophet’s Family in the name of God and 
of His Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace). This kind of love augments 
love of the Messenger (UWBP) and becomes a means to love God Almighty. Thus, it 
is permissible, and its excess is not harmful or aggressive, nor does it call for reproach 
and hostility towards others. 

The Second Kind of love takes the means as the object, it is to love something or 
someone for itself or himself. In it, one does not think of the Messenger (UWBP), but 
devotes  one’s  love  to  ‘Ali  on  account  of  his  bravery,  and  to  Hasan  and  Husain  on 
account of their  greatness and lofty qualities, no matter if one  knows the Messenger 
(UWBP)  or  recognizes  God.  This  love  does  not  lead  to  love  for  God  and  His 
Messenger  (UWBP);  besides,  when  excessive,  it  results  in  censure  of  others  and 
enmity  towards  them.  It  was  on  account  of  this  kind  of  love  that  such  people  held 
aloof from Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, and fell into loss. Their negative love, indeed, is the 
source of misfortune.  

According to an authentic narration, God’s Most Noble Messenger (Upon whom 
be  blessings  and  peace)  declared:  “When  Persian  and  Roman  girls  serve  you,  then 
calamity  and  misfortune  will  be  with  you,  and  your  struggles  will  be  between 
yourselves,  with  the  wicked  preying  on  the  virtuous.”63  After  thirty  years,  his 
predictions came true. 

Again, according to an authentic narration, he declared: “The fortress of Khaybar 
will be conquered at ‘Ali’s hand.”64 As a miracle of his prophethood and beyond all 
expectation, the following day ‘Ali ripped off the gate of the fortress of Khaybar, used 
it as a shield, and seized the fortress. When he threw it aside after the conquest, eight 
strong  men – or according to another version, forty – tried to lift it, but could not do 
so.65 

                                                 
63 Tirmidhi (Tahqiq: Ahmad Shakir), no: 2262; al-Albani, Silsilat al-Ahadith al-Sahiha, 954; al-
Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, x, 232, 237. 
64 Bukhari, Jihad, 102, 143; al-Maghazi, 38; Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 34, 35; Musnad,  ii, 484; v, 
333;  Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, iv, 205. 
65 Suyuti, al-Durar al-Muntathira (Mustafa al-Babi al-Halabi, 1960), 118; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-
Nihaya, iv, 189-190; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 365. 

 

135

The  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  also  predicted  the 
Battle of Siffin between ‘Ali and Mu‘awiya, saying: “The  hour shall  not come until 
two parties with a single claim fight each other.”66 

He also declared that a group of rebels would kill ‘Ammar.67 When ‘Ammar was 
killed at the Battle of Siffin, ‘Ali cited this as a proof that Mu‘awiya’s followers were 
rebellious; but Mu‘awiya interpreted it differently, and also ‘Amr b. al-‘As said: “The 
rebels are murderers, not all of us.” 

The Noble Messenger (UWBP) also said: “As long as ‘Umar is alive, no sedition 

will erupt among you.”68 And so it happened. 

Before accepting faith, Sahl b. ‘Amr was once captured in a battle. ‘Umar said to 
the  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP):  “Allow  me  to  pull  out  his  teeth,  for  he,  with  his 
eloquent  speech,  incited  the  idolatrous  Quraysh  to  wage  war  against  us.”  God’s 
Messenger (UWBP) replied: “It may be that he will assume a stance pleasing to you, 
O  ‘Umar.”69  In  fact,  at  the  time  of  the  Prophet’s  demise,  which  caused  panic  and 
agitation,  Sahl,  with  his  well-known  eloquence,  calmed  and  comforted  the 
Companions  in  Mecca  with  an  address;  while  in  Medina  Abu  Bakr,  with  his  great 
firmness,  was  also  giving  a  very  important  address  to  comfort  the  Companions. 
Surprisingly, the two addresses resemble each other in regard to their wording. 

To Suraqa, the Prophet (UWBP) once said: “You will wear the two bracelets of 
Chosroes.”70 Chosroes was wiped out during the caliphate of ‘Umar. When Chosroes’ 
jewelry  arrived,  ‘Umar  put  the  bracelets  on  Suraqa, saying,  “Praise  be  to  God  Who 
took these off Chosroes and put them on Suraqa.”71 This confirmed the report of the 
Prophet (UWBP). 

The Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) also declared: “Once 

Chosroes the Persian has gone, there will be no other.”72 So it turned out. 

                                                 
66 Muslim, Fitan, 4; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, viii, 259; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 704; al-Albani, Sahih 
Jami’ al-Saghir, vi, 174, no: 7294. 
67 Bukhari, Salat, 63; Muslim, Fitan, 70, 72, 73; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 34; Musnad, ii, 161, 164, 206; iii, 
5, 22, 28, 91; iv, 197, 199; v, 215, 306, 307; vi, 289, 300, 311, 315; Kattani, Nazm al-Mutanathir, 126; 
Ibn Hibban, Sahih, viii, 260; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 155; iii, 191, 397; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 339; 
al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-Rabbani, xxiii, 142. 
68 , Mawaqit, 4; Fitan, 22; Muslim, Iman, 231; Fitan, 27; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 9; Musnad,  v, 401, 405. 
69 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 704; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 218; al-‘Asqalani, al-Isaba, ii, 
93-94; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 282. 
70 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 703; al-‘Asqalani, al-Isaba, no: 3115. 
71 Ibid.; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 344. 
72 Bukhari, Iman, 31; Muslim, Fitan, 76; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 41; Musnad, ii, 233, 240; v, 92, 99; Qadi Iyad, 
al-Shifa’, i, 337; al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi (Tahqiq: ‘Abd al-Wahhab), iv, 462, 663. 

 

136

He  once  said  to  Chosroes’  envoy:  “Chosroes  has  now  been  killed  by  his  son 
Shirviya  Parviz.”73  Upon  investigating  and  finding  out  that  he  had  indeed  been 
murdered at that very time, the envoy accepted Islam. The name of the envoy occurs 
in some narrations as Firuz. 

According  to  an  authentic  narration,  the  Noble  Messenger  (UWBP)  once 
mentioned a secret letter that Khatib b. Balta‘a had sent to the Quraysh. He sent ‘Ali 
and Miqdad to fetch it, saying, “There is a person at such-and-such a location bearing 
such-and-such a letter. Take it and bring it here.” They went and brought exactly the 
letter  he  had  described  from  exactly  the  place.  The  Prophet  (UWBP)  summoned 
Khatib  and  asked  him  why  he  had  done  it.  Khatib  apologized,  and  the  Prophet 
(UWBP) pardoned him.74 

Again, according to an authentic narration concerning ‘Utba b. Abi Lahab, God’s 
Messenger  (UWBP)  prayed:  “May  he  be  eaten  by  one  of  the  dogs  of  God!”,75 
predicting the terrible fate of ‘Utba. For while on his way to the Yemen, ‘Utba was 
devoured by a lion. Both the malediction and the prediction of the Prophet were thus 
confirmed. 

At  the  conquest  of  Mecca,  as  is  also  related  in  an  authentic  narration,  Bilal  al-
Habashi went up onto the roof of the Ka‘ba and made the call to prayer, while Abu 
Sufyan, ‘Attab b. Asid, and Harith b. Hisham, from among the leaders of the Quraysh, 
were  sitting  together  nearby.  ‘Attab  said:  “My  father  was  fortunate  enough  not  to 
witness  this  moment.”  Harith  said  contemptuously  about  Bilal:  “Could  Muhammad 
have  not  found  someone  other  than  this  black  crow  to  make  the  mu’ezzin?”  Abu 
Sufyan said: “I am afraid to say anything, for he will come to know of whatever I say. 
Even if nothing else informs him, the rocks of this Batha [Mecca] will do so.” Indeed, 
a little later the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) encountered 
them  and  repeated  to  them  their  conversation  word  for  word.  That  very  moment 
‘Attab and Harith became Muslims.76 

See,  wretched  denier  who  does  not  recognize  the  Messenger  (UWBP)!  Two 
stubborn leaders of the Quraysh came to believe  on hearing this single report of his 
from the Unseen. How corrupted your heart must be, for you hear about thousands of 
miracles having the certainty of ‘consensus in  

                                                 
73 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 343; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 211; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 700; 
al-Albani, Silsilat al-Ahadith al-Sahiha, 1427. 
74 Bukhari, Jihad, 141; Tafsir, 60:1; Maghazi 46; Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 161; Abu Da’ud, Jihad, 
98; Tirmidhi, 60:1; Musnad, i, 79; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 301; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 342. 
75 al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 139; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 664. 
76 al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 219, 220; al-‘Asqalani, al-Matalib al-‘Aliya, no: 4366; Ibn al-Qayyim 
al-Jawzi, Zad al-Ma’ad (Tahqiq: al-Arnavud), iii, 409-410; Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabi, ii, 413. 

 

137

meaning’ like this one, and still  you are not completely satisfied! However, to return 
to our subject. 

According to an authentic narration, ‘Abbas was captured by the Companions in 
the  Battle of Badr. When  he was asked for ransom, he said he did not have money. 
God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) said to him: “You and  your 
wife Umm Fadl hid that much money [he gave the exact amount] in such-and-such a 
place.”77 ‘Abbas confirmed this, saying: “This was a secret known by only the two of 
us,” and became a Muslim. 

Also  according  to  an  authentic  narration,  a  dangerous  Jewish  sorcerer  named 
Labid  once  concocted  a  strong  and  effective  spell  to  harass  God’s  Messenger 
(UWBP). He wrapped hair and thread around a comb, bewitched it, and threw it into a 
well.  The  Noble  Messenger  (UWBP)  told  his  Companions  including  ‘Ali  to  go  and 
bring  the  spell  in  the  well,  which  they  did,  finding  it  exactly  as  described.  As  they 
unwrapped the hair, the Messenger’s (UWBP) discomfort lessened.78 

Again, according to an authentic  narration, the Noble Messenger (UWBP) once 
gave  the  news  of  the  awesome  fate  of  an  apostate  to  a  group  that  included  such 
important persons as Abu Hurayra and Hudhayfa, saying: “One of you will enter the 
Fire with a tooth bigger than Mount Uhud.”79 Abu Hurayra related: “I was afraid, as 
later only two remained from that group, one of which was me. Finally, the other man 
was  killed  in  the  Battle  of  Yamama  as  one  of  the  followers  of  Musaylima.”80  The 
truth of the Prophet’s (UWBP) prediction was thus confirmed. 

It is related through an authentic chain of reports that ‘Umayr and Safwan, before 
they became Muslims, once decided to kill the Most Noble Messenger (Upon whom 
be  blessings  and  peace)  for  a  handsome  reward  that  had  been  offered  them.  When 
‘Umayr  arrived  in  Medina  with  this  intention,  the  Messenger  (UWBP)  summoned 
him,  and,  putting  his  hand  on  ‘Umayr’s  chest,  told  him  about  what  he  had  planned 
with Safwan. ‘Umayr affirmed it and became a Muslim.81 

                                                 
77 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 343; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 699; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 206, 
207;  al-Haythami, Majma’al-Zawa’id, vi, 85. 
78 Bukhari, Tibb, 47, 49, 50; Adab, 56; Da’wat, 57; Bad’ al-Khalq, 11; Muslim, Salam, 43; Ibn Maja, 
Tibb, 45; Musnad, vi, 57, 63, 96; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 706; Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih 
(Tahqiq: al-Albani), iii, 174, no: 5893. 
79 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, iv, 342; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 203; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, 
viii, 289-290; Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih, iii, 103. 
80 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 342; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 298. 
81 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 342, 343; original: al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 286-7; viii, 284-6; 
Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, iii, 313. 

 

138

Like  those  mentioned  above,  many  predictions  which  the  Noble  Messenger 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) gave concerning the Unseen have been recorded 
in  the  six  best-known,  authentic  books  of  Hadith,  together  with  the  chains  of  the 
narrators. As for the occurrences related in this work, they are definite to the degree of 
‘consensus in meaning,’ being related in Bukhari and Muslim, which are accepted by 
the  scholars  as  the  most  authentic  sources  after  the  Qur’an,  and  in  the  other 
collections  like  Tirmidhi,  Nasa’i,  Abu  Da’ud,  Mustadrak  al-Hakim,  Musnad  al-
Ahmad b. Hanbal, and Dala’il al-Bayhaqi. 

Now,  unthinking  denier!  Do  not  shrug  these  off,  saying,  “Muhammad  the 
Arabian  was  clever!”  Because  the  accurate  predictions  of  Muhammad  (UWBP) 
concerning  the  Unseen  cannot  be  explained  except  in  either  of  the  following  two 
ways:  you  will  either  suppose that  this  blessed  person had  such piercing  vision  and 
expansive  genius  that  he  saw  and  knew  the  past  and  the  future  and  all  the  world; 
beheld the East, the West, and the whole universe; and discovered what happened in 
the  past  and  what  will  happen  in  the  future.  Such  a  quality  is  not  to  be  found  in  a 
human being, but if it was to be, it would certainly be a wonder, a gift, bestowed on 
him  by  the  Creator  of  the  world,  which  would  itself  be  the  greatest  of  miracles.  Or 
you  will  believe  this  blessed  person  to  be  an  official  and  a  student  of  One  under 
whose disposal and observation everything stands, under whose command are all ages 
and  all  the  species  and  realms  of  beings  in  the  cosmos,  in  whose  great  ledger  is 
recorded  everything,  so  that  He  may  show  and  communicate  them  to  his  student 
whenever  He  wishes.  Thus, Muhammad  the  Arabian (Upon  whom be blessings  and 
peace) instructs others as he himself is instructed by the Lord of Pre-Eternity. 

It  is  related  in  an  authentic  narration  that  when  the  Prophet  (UWBP)  appointed 
Khalid  b.  al-Walid  to  fight  against  Ukaydir,  the  head  of  the  Dumat  al-Jandal,  he 
informed Khalid that he would find Ukaydir on a wild ox hunt,82 and that he would be 
captured without resistance. Khalid captured Ukaydir in exactly this way. 

According to an authentic narration, when the Quraysh hung up on the wall of the 
Ka‘ba  a  leaf  on  which  were  written  words  against  the  Bani  Hashim,  the  Prophet 
(UWBP)  said  to  them:  “Worms  have  eaten  the  leaf,  except  the  parts  bearing  the 
names of God.”83 They examined the leaf to find it in the same condition as had been 
described. 

                                                 
82 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 344; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 218; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 704; 
Ibn al-Qayyim, Zad al-Ma’ad, v, 538-9; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 519; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-
Nihaya, iv, 30. 
83 .Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 345; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 720; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 706; 
Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, iii, 96-7; Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabi, i, 371. 

 

139

According  to  an  authentic  narration,  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blesssings  and  peace)  said:  “There    will  be  a  big  epidemic  during  the  conquest  of 
Jerusalem.”84  When  Jerusalem  was  conquered  during  the  caliphate  of  ‘Umar,  a 
widespread epidemic caused in three days the death of about seventy thousand people. 
Again,  according  to  an  authentic  narration,  the  Prophet  (Upon  whom  be 
blesssings and peace) predicted that Basra85 and Baghdad would come into existence, 
which at that time  had not been founded, that the treasure of the world would enter 
Baghdad,86 and that the Turks and the people living on the shores of the Caspian Sea 
would  do  battle  with  the  Arabs  and  that  the  majority  of  them  would  later  enter  the 
fold  of  Islam,87  and  that  among  the  Arabs  they  would  come  to  dominate  them.  He 
said: “The Persians [non-Arabs] will almost predominate among you, consuming your 
booty and smiting you.”88 

He also said: “The ruin of my community will be at the hands of the wicked ones 
from  Quraysh,”89  suggesting  the  disorder  caused  by  the  wicked  leaders  of  the 
Umayyads, such as Walid and Yazid.  

He  furthermore  predicted  that  apostasy  would  take  place  in  such  areas  as 

Yamama.90 

During the  famous Battle of Khandaq, he declared: “From now on, I will make 
assaults  on  the  Quraysh  and  their  confederates,  not  they  on  me.”91  This  was  also 
verified. 

According  to  an  authentic  narration,  he  said  a  few  months  prior  to  his  death: 
“One  of  God’s bondsmen  has  been  given  a  choice,  and  he  chose  that  which  is  with 
God.”92 

                                                 
84 Bukhari, Tibb, 30; Khiyal, 13; Muslim, Salam, 98, 100; Muwatta’, Madina, 22, 24; Musnad, iv, 195-
6; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, vi, 383; Suyuti, al-Khasa’is al-Kubra, ii, 477-8. 
85 al-Albani, Sahih al-Jami’ al-Saghir, vi, 268, no: 7736; Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih, no: 5433. 
86 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 344; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 703; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, 
x, 102; Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih, no: 5433. 
87 Bukhari, Jihad, 95; Muslim, Fitan, 64-66; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 37; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 36. 
88 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 341; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 194; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 692; 
al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, vii, 310; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 519; Musnad, ii, 288, 296, 304, 
324, 377, 520; iv, 66; v, 38. 
89 Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 479, 527, 572; Musnad, ii, 288, 296, 301, 304, 
324, 377, 520, 536; iv, 66; (with different wording) v, 38; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, viii, 215, 252. 
90 Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; Maghazi, 70; Ta’bir, 40; Muslim, Ru’ya, 21, 22; Tirmidhi, Ru’ya, 10; 
Musnad, ii, 319, Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, v, 334-6; vi, 358, 360, 524. 
91 Bukhari, Maghazi, 29; Musnad, iv, 262; vi, 394; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, vi, 272. 
92 Bukhari, Manaqib al-Ansar, 45; Salat, 80; Fada’il al-Sahaba, 3; Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 2; 
Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 15; Abu Da’ud, Muqaddima, 14; Musnad, iii, 18, 478; iv, 211; v, 139; Ibn Hibban, 
Sahih, viii, 200; ix, 58. 

 

140

About  Zayd  b.  Suwahan,  he  said:  “One  of  his  limbs  will  precede  him  to 
Paradise.”93 In the Battle of Nihawand, one of his  hands was martyred and in effect 
reached heaven first. 

The  incidents  we  have  so  far  mentioned  concerning  predictions  relating  to  the 
Unseen comprise only one out of his ten different kinds of miracle. Yet of this  kind 
alone, we have not even mentioned one tenth. In addition to what is mentioned here, 
four  general  kinds  of  miracle  concerning  predictions  of  the  Unseen  have  been 
described briefly in the Twenty-Fifth Word, which is about the miraculousness of the 
Qur’an. Now consider the kinds mentioned here together with the four extensive sorts 
communicated  from  the  Unseen  by  the  tongue  of  the  Qur’an,  you  will  see  what 
conclusive,  indisputable,  sound,  brilliant,  and  firm  proof  of  his  messengership  they 
form. Indeed, anyone whose heart and mind are not corrupted will of a surety believe 
that  Muhammad  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  was  the  Messenger  of  a 
Glorious One who is the Creator of all things, the One  All-Knowing of the  Unseen, 
and received knowledge from Him. 

SEVENTH SIGN 

We  will  give  in  this  Sign  a  few  examples  from  among  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP) 
miracles that relate to his effecting increase in food and that are definite to the degree 
of  ‘consensus  in  meaning.’  But  before  going  into  the  subject,  some  introductory 
comments will be appropriate. 

Introduction:  Each  of  the  following  examples  of  miracles  is  narrated,  as 
authentic, through various – sometimes as many as sixteen – chains of transmission. 
Most  of  them  occurred  in  the  presence  of  large  assemblies,  and  were  narrated  by 
many truthful persons of  good repute from among those present. For example, from 
among  seventy  men  who  partook  of  four  handfuls  of  food  and  were  filled,94  one 
relates the incident and the others do not contradict him. Their silence thus indicates 
their  confirmation.  For  if  in  that era  of  truth  and  truthfulness  the  Companions,  who 
were lovers of the truth and earnest and honest, had witnessed even the tiniest lie, they 
would have rejected and denied it. But the incidents we will be citing were  narrated 
by  many,  and  the  others  who  witnessed  them  remained  silent.  Thus,  each  of  these 
incidents has the certainty of ‘consensus in meaning.’ 

                                                 
93 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 343; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 702; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 214; 
al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 398; al-‘Asqalani, al-Matalib al-‘Aliya, iv, 91, no: 4047. 
94 Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; Muslim, Ashriba, 142; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; Ibn Maja, At’ima, 47; 
Muwatta’, Sifat al-Nabi, 19. 

 

141

Furthermore, books of both history and the Prophet’s (UWBP) biography testify 
that,  next  to  the  preservation  of  the  Qur’an  and  its  verses,  the  Companions  worked 
with  all  their  strength  to  preserve  the  deeds  and  words  of  God’s  Most  Noble 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace), and especially those relating to the 
injunctions of the Shari‘a and to miracles, paying extreme attention to their accuracy. 
They never neglected even the tiniest aspect of his conduct, actions, and states. This 
and the fact that they recorded them is testified to by books of Hadith.  

In addition, in the Era of Bliss, they wrote down and recorded very many of the 
Hadiths  concerning  the  injunctions  of  the  Law  and  his  miracles.  The  Seven 
‘Abdullah’s95  in  particular  recorded  them  in  writing.  Especially  ‘Abdullah  b.  al-
‘Abbas, known as the Interpreter of the Qur’an, and ‘Abdullah b. ‘Amr b. al-‘As some 
thirty to forty years later, and the thousands of exacting scholars of the generation that 
followed  the  Companions  recorded  the  Hadiths  and  miracles  in  writing.  Still  later, 
chiefly  the  four  great  interpreters  of  the  Law  and  thousands  of  exacting  scholars  of 
Hadith related them and preserved them in writing. Then two hundred years after the 
Hijra,  foremost  Bukhari  and  Muslim  and  the  six  accepted  books  of  tradition, 
undertook  the  duty  of  their  preservation.  Many  severe  critics  such  as  Ibn  al-Jawzi 
emerged  who  identified  false  reports  which  had  been  produced  by  deniers,  the 
unthinking, the ignorant, or those who had recalled them wrongly. Later, learned and 
exacting  scholars  like  Jalal  al-Din  al-Suyuti,  who  seventy  times  was  honoured  in  a 
waking state by the presence and conversation of God’s Noble Messenger (UWBP), 
differentiated 
traditions  from  other  sayings  and 
fabrications.  

the  diamonds  of  authentic 

Thus,  the  incidents  and  miracles  we  shall  speak  of,  have  come  down  to  us 
through  numerous,  perhaps  uncountable,  strong  and  trustworthy  hands,  and  have 
reached us in sound condition. “All praise be to God, this  is  from the bounty of my 
Lord.” It is for this reason that one’s mind should be freed from the notion that these 
incidents  have  been  distorted  or  confused  in  any  way  in  being  passed  down  all  the 
way from that time to the present. 

T  h  e    F  i  r  s  t    E  x  a  m  p  l  e  of  definite  miracles  concerning  the  Prophet’s 
(UWBP)  increase  of  food  through  his  blessing.  The  six  accurate  books  of  tradition, 
Bukhari  and  Muslim  included,  unanimously  relate  that  during  the  feast  on  the 
occasion  of  the  Noble  Messenger’s  (UWBP)  marriage  to  Zaynab,  Anas’s  mother, 
Umm Sulaym,  

                                                 
95 The seven ‘Abdullah’s (al-‘Abadila al-Sab’a): ‘Abdullah b. ‘Abbas, ‘Abdullah b. ‘Umar, ‘Abdullah 
b. Mas’ud, ‘Abdullah b. Raw\ha, ‘Abdullah b. Salam, ‘Abdullah b. ‘Amr b. al-‘As, ‘Abdullah b. Abi 
Awfa (R. A.). 

 

142

prepared  a dish  by  frying  two  handfuls  of  dates  in  oil  and  sent  it  with  Anas  to  the 
Messenger  (UWBP).  The  Messenger  (UWBP)  told  him:  “Go  and  invite  so-and-so 
(naming some persons), and also invite whomever you encounter on your way.” Anas 
invited  those  named  and  those  he  met. About  three  hundred  Companions  came  and 
filled the Messenger’s (UWBP) room and anteroom. He said: “Make circles of ten.” 
He  placed  his blessed  hand  on that  little  amount  of  food, uttered  supplications,  and 
told them to help themselves. All of them ate and were fully satisfied. Afterwards the 
Messenger (UWBP) asked Anas to remove the food. Anas later related: “I could not 
tell if there was more of it when I set it down, or when I removed it.”96 

S e c o n d  E x a m p l e : Abu Ayyub al-Ansari, the Prophet’s (UWBP) host, 
relates  that  when  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace) 
honoured  his  house,  he  had  prepared  a  meal  for  two,  which  would  suffice  the 
Messenger  (UWBP)  and  Abu  Bakr.  But  the  Messenger  (UWBP)  told  him:  “Invite 
thirty  men  from  among  the  distinguished  Ansar!”97  Abu  Ayyub  said:  “Thirty  men 
came and ate. He then said: ‘Invite sixty men,’ which I did, and they also came and 
ate.  The  Prophet  (UWBP)  said  again:  ‘Invite  seventy  more.’  I  invited  them;  they 
came, and when they finished eating, there was  still food left  in the bowls. All who 
came  embraced  Islam  and  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  after  witnessing  this  miracle. 
One hundred and eighty men ate the food of two men.”98 

T h i r d  E x a m p l e : It is reported through many chains of transmission from 
‘Umar  b.  al-Khattab,  Abu  Hurayra,  Salama  b.  Akwa‘,  Abu  ‘Amrat  al-Ansari  and 
others that on one expedition, the army went hungry. They referred themselves to the 
Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace),  and  he  told  them:  “Gather 
whatever food  is  left  in  your  saddle-bags.”  Everyone  brought  a  few  pieces  of  dates 
and put them on a mat. The most they could put together was four handfuls. Salama 
related:  “I  estimated  it  amounted  to  the  size  of  a  sitting  goat.”  Then  the  Noble 
Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  announced:  “Everyone  bring  his 
dish!” They pressed forward, and no one in the whole army remained with an empty 
dish,  all  the  dishes  were  filled.  There  was  even  some  left  over.  One  of  the 
Companions later said: “I realized from the way that  

                                                 
96 Bukhari, Nikah, 64; Muslim, Nikah, 94, 95; Tirmidhi, 33:21; Nasa’i, Nikah, 84; Abu Da’ud, Adab, 
95; Musnad, iii, 29; v, 462; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 294. 
97 Ansar–Helpers: those of the Medinan Companions who had the migrants from Mecca to stay in their 
houses. (Tr.) 
98 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 292; al-Haythami, al-Majma’ al Zawa’id, vii, 303; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-
Shifa’, iii, 33; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 604. 

 

143

increase  was  obtained  that  if  the  whole  world  had  come,  the  food  still  would  have 
been sufficient.”99 

F o u r t h  E x a m p l e : As recorded in all of the six books including Bukhari 
and Muslim, ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abu Bakr al-Siddiq relates: “We, one  hundred and 
thirty Companions, were with the Noble Messenger (UWBP) on an expedition. About 
four handfuls of dough were prepared and a goat was slaughtered and cooked, and its 
liver and kidneys roasted. I swear by God that from that roasted meat (the liver and 
kidneys)  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  gave  a  small  piece  to  each  and  put  the  cooked 
meat into two large bowls. After we had all eaten until we were filled there was still 
some left over, which I loaded onto a camel.”100 

F i f t h  E x a m p l e : As is recorded in the six books, Jabir al-Ansari related 
under oath: “During the Ahzab expedition on the celebrated day of Khandaq, about a 
thousand  people  ate  from  four  handfuls  of  rye  bread  and  a  young  cooked  goat;  yet 
food was still left over. That day the food had been cooked in my house, and after the 
one thousand people had left, the pot was still boiling with meat in it, and bread was 
being made from the dough; for the Noble Messenger (UWBP) had wetted the dough 
and the pot with his blessed mouth, beseeching God for plenty.”101 

S i x t h  E x a m p l e : According to an authentic narration from Abu Talha, the 
uncle  of  Anas  who  served  God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace), 
the Messenger (UWBP) fed seventy to eighty men with a small amount of rye bread 
that  Anas  had  brought  under  his  arm.  The  Messenger  (UWBP)  ordered:  “Break the 
bread into small pieces!”, and prayed for increase. Because the house was small, they 
came ten at a time, and left having filled themselves.102 

S e v e n t h  E x a m p l e : It is related as authentic in accurate books such as al-
Shifa’  al-Sharif  and  Muslim  that  Jabir  al-Ansari  narrated:  “Once  a  man  asked  the 
Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be blessings  and  peace)  for  food  for his  household. 
The Messenger (UWBP) gave him a half load of barley. For a long time he ate of the 
barley together with his family and guests. From time to time they would take a look 
at it, but it never finished. Then they measured it to see how much it had decreased. 
After that the  

                                                 
99 Bukhari, Sharika, 1; Jihad, 123; Muslim, Iman, 44, 45; Musnad, iii, 11, 418. 
100 Bukhari, Hiba, 28; At’ima, 6; Muslim, Ashriba, 175; Musnad, i, 197, 198; al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-
Rabbani, xx, 55. 
101 Bukhari, Maghazi, 29; Muslim, Ashriba, 141; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 31; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh 
al-Shifa’, i, 290; Suyuti, Kanz al-‘Ummal,  xii, 409, 424. 
102 Bukhari, At’ima, 6, 48; Muslim, Ashriba, 142, 143; Musnad, iii, 218; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 
291, 297; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 31. 

 

144

blessing of abundance disappeared and the barley began to dwindle rapidly. The man 
went to the Messenger (UWBP) and told him what had happened. God’s Messenger 
(UWBP)  replied:  “If  you  had  not  put  it  to  the  test  by  measuring  it,  it  would  have 
lasted you a life-time.”103 

E i g h t h  E x a m p l e : According to accurate books such as Tirmidhi, Nasa’i, 
Bayhaqi,  and al-Shifa’ al-Sharif, Samura b. Jundub related  that  a bowl  of  meat  was 
brought to the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace). From morning 
to evening, many groups of men came and ate from it.104 

As  we  explained  in  the  introduction  to  this  section,  this  is  not  the  narration  of 
Samura alone, since he narrated this incident on behalf of all those present, and with 
their approval. 

N i n t h  E x a m p l e : It is also narrated by reliable and trusted scholars such as 
the well-known author of al-Shifa’ al-Sharif, Ibn Abi Shayba, and Tabarani, that Abu 
Hurayra  related:  “The  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace) 
commanded  me,  ‘Invite  the  poor  Meccan  migrants  who  have  made  the  bench 
(suffa)105 of the mosque their home and who number more than a hundred.’ So I went 
and searched for them and gathered them together. A tray of food was set before us, 
and we ate as much as we wanted, then we arose. The dish was as full as it had been 
when first set down, only, there were fingermarks on the food.106 

Thus, this incident was related by Abu Hurayra in the name of all the People of 
the Bench, supported by their confirmation. Hence, the incident is as definite as if all 
the People of the Bench had related it. Is it at all possible that if it had not been true 
those men of truth and perfection would have remained silent and not denied it? 

T e n t h  E x a m p l e : According to an authentic narration from ‘Ali, the Noble 
Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  once  gathered  the  Bani  ‘Abd  al-
Muttalib. They  were about forty, including  some who would eat a  young camel and 
drink a  gallon of milk at one meal. Yet  for them he  had prepared only  a  handful of 
food.  All  ate  and  were  satisfied,  and  the  food  remained  just  as  it  had  been  before. 
Later he brought milk in a  

                                                 
103 Muslim, Fada’il, 3, No: 2281; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, vi, 114. 
104 Tirmidhi (Tahqiq: Ahmad Shakir), no: 2629; Abu Da’ud, Muqaddima, 9; Musnad, v, 12, 18; al-
Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 618. 
105 The People of the Bench: those among the Meccan migrants (Muhajirun) who lived in the outer part 
of the mosque, who devoted their lives to the preservation and dissemination of the Qur’an, Sunna, and 
Hadith, and whose livelihood was provided by the Prophet (UWBP). (Tr.) 
106 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 293; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 606; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, 
viii, 308; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, vi, 101. 

 

145

wooden bowl that would have been sufficent for only three or four persons. They all 
drank their fill.107 

A miracle of plenty as definite as ‘Ali’s courage and loyalty! 
E  l  e  v  e  n  t  h    E  x  a  m  p  l  e  :  According  to  an  authentic  narration,  on  the 
occasion of ‘Ali’s marriage to Fatima al-Zahra, The Noble Messenger (Upon whom 
be  blessings  and  peace)  ordered  Bilal  al-Habashi:  “Have  bread  made  from  a  few 
handfuls  of  flour;  also  slaughter  a  young  camel!”  Bilal  relates:  “I  brought  the  food 
and he put his hand on it to bless it. Later, the Companions arrived in groups, ate, and 
left.  From the  remaining  food,  he  sent  a  full  bowl  to  each  of  his  wives,  saying  that 
they should eat and feed anyone who visited them.”108 

Such blessed plenty was indeed necessary for such a blessed marriage! 
T  w  e  l  f  t  h    E  x  a  m  p  l  e  :  Imam  Ja‘far  al-Sadiq  related  from  his  father 
Muhammad al-Baqir, and he from his father, Zayn al-‘Abidin, and he from ‘Ali, that 
Fatima al-Zahra had prepared enough food for herself and ‘Ali. She then sent ‘Ali to 
invite  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  to  come  and  eat 
with them. God’s Messenger (UWBP) came and told them to send a dish of food to 
each of his wives. Fatima said that after a dish of food had been set aside for himself, 
‘Ali,  Fatima,  and  their  children,  they  lifted  up  the  saucepan  and  it  was  full  to 
overflowing. Through God’s will, they ate of the food for a long time afterwards.109 

Why  do  you  not believe  this  miracle  of  increase  just  as  if  you  had  witnessed it 
with  your  own  eyes,  since  it  comes  from  this  luminous,  elevated  chain  of 
transmission? Satan himself could find no excuse in the face of this one! 

T  h  i  r  t  e  e  n  t h    E x  a  m  p  l  e  :  Veracious  authorities  such  as  Abu  Da’ud, 
Ahmad b. Hanbal, and Bayhaqi, narrate from Dukayn al-Ahmasi b. Sa‘id al-Muzayn, 
and from Nu‘man b. Muqarrin al-Ahmasi al-Muzayn, who with his six brothers was 
honoured  with  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  conversation  and  was  a  Companion,  and  by 
way of Jarir through numerous chains of transmission from ‘Umar b. al-Khattab, that 
God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) ordered ‘Umar b. al-
Khattab: “Equip  four hundred horsemen from the Ahmasi tribe with provisions for a  

                                                 
107 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 293; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 607; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 36; 
al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 302-3; Ahmad b. Hanbal, Fada’il al-Sahaba (Tahqiq: 
Wasiyyullah), 1220; Musnad, i, 159. 
108 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 297; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 613; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, iii, 
160. 
109 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 294; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 608; Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, al-Matalib 
al-‘Aliya, iv, 73, no: 4001. 

 

146

journey!”  ‘Umar  replied:  “O  Messenger  of  God!  What  we  have  in  hand  is  the 
equivalent of a seated young camel.” The Messenger (UWBP) said: “Go and give it to 
them!” So he went and out of that half load of dates, gave the four hundred horsemen 
sufficient provisions. And he stated that it remained as before, without diminishing.110 
Thus,  this  miracle  of  plenty  occurred  in  connection  with  four  hundred men  and 
‘Umar in particular. They are behind the narrations, supporting them, and their silence 
confirms  them.  Do  not  ignore  these  narrations  because  they  are  related  by  a  few 
individuals only, for if the  incident had only been reported by a single  individual, it 
still would have the certainty of ‘consensus in meaning.’ 

F  o  u  r  t  e  e  n  t  h    E  x  a  m  p  l  e  :  All  the  accurate  books  of  tradition,  and 
foremost Bukhari and Muslim, narrate that when Jabir’s father died, he was heavily in 
debt. His creditors were Jews. Jabir offered the creditors all  his  father’s possessions 
but  they  did  not  accept  them.  The  fruit  produced  by  his  orchard  over  many  years 
would have been insufficient to defray the debt. The Noble Messenger (Upon whom 
be blessings  and peace)  said:  “Pick  and gather  in  all  the  fruit  in  the  orchard!”  They 
did so, then the Noble Messenger (UWBP) walked around the crop and prayed. Then 
Jabir gave from the amount corresponding to his father’s debt. What was left was as 
much as the annual produce of the orchard. And according to another narration, it was 
equal  to  the  amount  he  gave  the  creditors.  The Jews  were  amazed  and  astounded  at 
this.111 

See,  this  clear  miracle  of  plenty  was  not  only  reported by  a  few  narrators  like 
Jabir;  many  people  connected  with  it  described  and  narrated  it,  thus  giving  it  the 
degree of ‘consensus in meaning.’ 

F i f t e e n t h  E x a m p l e : Exact scholars, and foremost Tirmidhi and Imam 
Bayhaqi,  related  through  a  sound  chain  of  authorities  from  Abu  Hurayra  that  Abu 
Hurayra said: “During one expedition – that of Tabuk according to another narration –  
the army went hungry. God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) 
asked:  ‘Is  there  nothing?’  I  said:  ‘I  have  one  or  two  dates  in  my  saddle-bag.’  – 
According  to  another  narration,  it  was  fifteen. –  He  said:  ‘Bring  them  here!’  I  took 
them to him, and he plunged his hand into them and took a handful. He put them into 
a  

                                                 
110 al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-Rabbani, xxii, 85; Musnad, v, 445; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 294; ‘Ali al-Qari, 
Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 609; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, v, 365. 
111 Bukhari, Wasaya, 36; Buyu’, 51; Sulh, 13; Istiqrad, 18; Nasa’i, Wasaya, 3, 4; Musnad, iii, 313, 365, 
373, 391, 395, 398; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, viii, 167; al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-Rabbani, xxii, 60; Qadi Iyad, al-
Shifa’, i, 295. 

 

147

dish, and offered a supplication for their increase. Then he called the men in groups of 
ten and they all ate of them. Then he said: ‘Take what you brought, hold it, and do not 
turn  it  upside down.’112  I  put my  hand  in  the  bag;  there  were  in  my  hands  as many 
dates as I had brought. Later, during the lifetime of the Prophet (UWBP), and those of 
Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and ‘Uthman, I ate of those dates.” – It is narrated through another 
chain of transmission: “I gave several loads of those dates to be used in God’s way. 
Later the bag containing the dates was plundered when ‘Uthman was assassinated.” 

Abu Hurayra was a constant and important student and disciple among the People 
of the Bench, the sacred school and tekke of the Teacher of the Universe, the Pride of 
the World (UWBP). In addition, that Teacher (UWBP) had prayed for his strength of 
memory. The miracle of plenty  he reported which occurred in a  large gathering  like 
the  expedition  of Tabuk,  should  therefore  be  as  sound  and  certain as  the  word  of  a 
whole army. 

S i x t e e n t h  E x a m p l e : Foremost Bukhari, and the accurate books relate 
through  an  authentic  line  of  transmission  that  once  Abu  Hurayra  was  hungry,  so  he 
followed the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) into his house. 
There  they  saw  that  a  cup  of  milk  had  been  brought  as  a  gift.  God’s  Messenger 
(UWBP) said to him: “Call all the People of the Bench!” Abu Hurayra relates: “I said 
to myself, I could drink all the milk myself, as I was most in need of it. But since it 
was  God’s  Messenger’s  (UWBP)  order,  I  fetched  the  People  of  the  Bench,  who 
numbered more than a hundred. God’s Messenger (UWBP) told me to offer them the 
milk. I gave the cup to each in turn, and they all drank until satisfied. At the end, the 
Messenger  (UWBP)  told  me,  ‘The  rest  is  for  me  and  you.’113  As  I  drank,  God’s 
Messenger  (UWBP)  kept  telling  me  to  drink  more,  until  I  said,  ‘I  swear  by  the 
Glorious One who sent you with the truth that I am too full to drink any more.’ Then 
God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  drank  the  rest,  invoking  the  name  of  God  and  offering 
Him thanks.” May it be a blessing for him a hundred thousand times! 

This indubitable, manifest miracle, as pure and sweet as milk itself, is related by 
all  six  books  with  their  sound  narrations,  and  foremost  Bukhari,  who  committed  to 
memory five hundred thousand Hadiths. Moreover, it is  

                                                 
112 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 47, no: 3839; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, vi, 110 (through various lines of 
transmission); Musnad, ii, 352; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 295; al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-Rabbani, xxii, 56; 
Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih, iii, 191, no: 5933. 
113 Bukhari, Riqaq, 17; Tirmidhi, Sifat al-Qiyama, 36, no: 2477; Musnad, ii, 515; Tirmidhi (Tahqiq: 
Ahmad Shakir), no: 2479; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 15; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 296. 

 

148

narrated by a celebrated, loyal, and brilliant student of the Prophet’s (UWBP) blessed 
school of the Bench, Abu Hurayra, who also cited as witness – rather, represented – 
all the other  students of the  Bench. Therefore, not to regard such a report as having 
the  certainty  of  ‘consensus,’  either  one’s  heart  must  be  corrupted,  or  one’s  brain, 
destroyed! Is it at all possible that so truthful a person as Abu Hurayra, who devoted 
all  his  life  to  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  Hadiths  and  to  religion,  and  who  heard  and 
himself transmitted the Hadith, “Whoever knowingly tells a lie concerning me should 
prepare for a seat in Hell-fire,”114 should have related an unfounded incident or saying 
that would have made him the target of the People of the Bench’s rebuttal, and that 
would have caused doubt concerning the value and soundness of all the other Hadiths 
he had memorized? God forbid! 

O our Sustainer! For the sake of the blessings You bestowed on Your Most Noble 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace), bestow the blessings of abundance 
on the favours with which You have provided us! 

An  Important  Point:  It  is  well-known  that  when  assembled  to-gether,  weak 
things become strong. Fine threads are twisted and they become a strong rope; strong 
ropes  are  wound  together  and  no  one  can  break  them.  In  this  Sign,  we  have  shown 
from among fifteen different kinds of miracles only one, that related to the blessings 
of  increase  and  plenty,  and  the  sixteen  examples  we  have  given  constitute  barely  a 
fifteenth of this one kind. However, each of the examples mentioned is a proof on its 
own, with enough strength to prove prophethood. Even if some of them – supposing 
the impossible – were to be regarded as weak, they could still not properly be called 
such, since whatever is united with the strong also becomes strong. 

When  considered  together,  the  sixteen  examples  given  above  constitute  a  great 
and  powerful  miracle  through  the  strength  of  definite,  indisputable  ‘consensus  in 
meaning.’ And when this miracle  is  joined by  fourteen other miracles of plenty that 
have not been mentioned, it manifests a supreme miracle that is as indestructable as a 
bunch of strong ropes. Now add this supreme miracle to the  fourteen other kinds of 
miracle,  and  see what  a  definite,  decisive  and  irrefutable  proof  they  provide  for the 
prophethood  of  Muhammad  (UWBP)!  Thus,  the  pillar  of  Muhammad’s  (UWBP) 
prophet 

                                                 
114 Bukhari, ‘Ilm, 39; Jana’iz, 33; Anbiya’, 50; Adab, 109; Muslim, Zuhd, 72; Abu Da’ud, ‘Ilm, 4; 
Tirmidhi, Fitan, 70; ‘Ilm, 8, 13; Tafsir, 1; Manaqib, 19; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 4; Darimi, Muqaddima, 
25, 46; Musnad, i, 70, 78. 

 

149

hood,  formed  by  such  a  collection,  has  the  strength  of  a  mountain.  Now  you  have 
understood  how unreasonable  it  is  to  regard  as unstable and  liable  to  fall  that  lofty, 
firm  heaven,  due  to  doubts  arising  from  lack  of  understanding  in  particular  matters 
and  examples.  Certainly  those  miracles  concerning  increase  and  plenty  show  that 
Muhammad  the  Arabian  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  was  the  beloved 
official and honoured servant of One All-Compassionate and Munificent who creates 
all sustenance and provides all beings with it, for contrary to His practice, He sent him 
banquets of different varieties of food out of nothing, from the pure Unseen. 

It is well-known that the Arabian Peninsula is a place where water and agriculture 
are  scarce. For  this  reason,  its  people,  and  particularly  the  Companions  in  the  early 
days  of  Islam,  suffered  want  and  scarcity.  They  were  also  frequently  afflicted  with 
thirst. Because of this, many important, evident miracles of Muhammad (Upon whom 
be blessings  and  peace)  were  related  to  food  and  water.  Rather  than  being  miracles 
proving  his  claim  to  prophethood,  these  wonders  were  on  account  of  need  and  like 
divine gifts, dominical bounty, and banquets of the Most Merciful One for His Most 
Noble Messenger (UWBP). For those who saw the miracles  had already assented to 
his  prophethood.  However,  as  the  miracles  took  place,  their  belief  increased  and 
became more luminous. 

EIGHTH SIGN 

This section describes miracles which were manifested in connection with water. 
Introduction:  It  is  known  that  when  events  that  take  place  among  groups  of 
people are related individually and not contradicted by others, it indicates the veracity 
of the reports. For by  virtue of his  very  nature, man  is  inclined to call  a lie a  lie. In 
particular  since  the  people  in  question  were  the  Companions,  who  were  more 
intolerant of lies than anyone else; if the incidents concerned God’s Noble Messenger 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace), and if the narrator was a renowned Companion, 
then certainly the narrator gives his report on behalf of all who witnessed the incident. 
However,  all  the  miracles  involving  water  that  we  will  cite  below  were  transmitted 
through  many  channels,  entrusted  by  many  Companions  to  thousands  of  precise 
scholars of the following  generation, who in turn passed them down correctly to the 
great  interpreters  of  the  Law  of  the  second  century.  They  received  them  with 
complete  seriousness  and  reverence,  accepted  them,  then  handed  them  down  to  the 
exacting  scholars  of  succeeding  centuries.  Hence,  the  traditions  have  reached  our 
times, passing through thou 

 

150

sands of strong, reliable hands. Moreover, the texts of Hadiths written down in the Era 
of Bliss, the era of the Prophet, were handed down in accurate form till they reached 
the  brilliant  scholars  of  the  science  of  Hadith  like  Bukhari  and  Muslim.  And  they, 
through punctilious examination and classification, collected together those that were 
undoubtedly  authentic,  and presented  and  taught  them  to us.  May  God  reward  them 
abundantly! 

Thus, the flowing of water from the fingers of God’s Messenger (Upon whom be 
blessings and peace) and many men drinking from it has the certainty of ‘consensus.’ 
It is impossible that the gathering who narrated it would have agreed upon a lie. The 
miracle  is  most  definite.  Moreover,  it  was  repeated  three  times  in  the  presence  of 
three  vast  assemblies.  A  great  many  accurate  scholars,  primarily,  Bukhari,  Muslim, 
Imam  Malik,  Imam  Shu‘ayb,  and  Imam  Qatada,  recorded  from  definitely 
authenticated narrations from a great many of the well-known Companions, primarily, 
the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  servants,  Anas,  Jabir,  and  Ibn  Mas‘ud  how  abundant  water 
flowed  from  his  fingers  and  the  army  drank  from  it.  We  will  cite  here  only  nine 
examples from numerous narrations about this kind of miracle. 

F i r s t  E x a m p l e : Accurate books of tradition, in particular Bukhari and 
Muslim,  report  from  an  authentic  narration  from  Anas:  “About  three  hundred  of  us 
were together with God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) in 
the  place  named  Zawra’.  He  ordered  us  to  perform  the  ablution  for  the  afternoon 
prayer, but we could find no water. So he told us to bring a little water, which we did, 
and  he  dipped  his  auspicious  hands  into  it. I saw  water  flow from  his  fingers  like  a 
fountain.  His  three  hundred  men  performed  the  ablution  with  the  water  and  drank 
from it.”115 

Anas  relates  this  incident  in  the  name  of three  hundred  men.  Is  it  possible  that 
those  three  hundred people  did  not  in  effect  assent  to  it, or  in  the  event  of  their  not 
assenting to it, not deny it? 

S e c o n d  E x a m p l e : As narrated in accurate books, and foremost Bukhari 
and Muslim, Jabir b. ‘Abdullah al-Ansari said: “We were one thousand five hundred 
men on the Hudaybiyya expedition, and we were thirsty. The Noble Messenger (Upon 
whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  performed  the  ablutions  from  a  leather  water-bag 
called a qirba, then he dipped his hand into it. I saw that water was flowing from his 
fingers like a spring. The one thousand five hundred men drank from it and filled their  

                                                 
115 Bukhari, Wudu, 32, 46; Manaqib, 25; Muslim, Fada’il, 45, 46; Tahara, 60; Abu Da’ud, Muqaddima, 
5; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; Muwatta’, Tahara, 32; Musnad, iii, 132, 147, 170, 215, 289; Ibn Hibban, 
Sahih, viii, 171; Tirmidhi (Ahmad Shakir), no: 3635. 

 

151

water-bags.” Once, Salim b. Abi’l-Ja‘d asked Jabir: “How many of you were there?” 
He  replied:  “The  water  would  have  been  enough  even  if  there  had  been  a  hundred 
thousand people, but we were fifteen hundred.”116 

Thus,  the  narrators  of  this  clear  miracle  in  effect  number  one  thousand  five 
hundred, for it is in man’s nature to reject lies. As for the Companions, who sacrificed 
their tribes and peoples, their fathers and mothers, their lives and all they possessed 
for the sake of truth and veracity, and could not have remained silent in the face of a 
lie, especially in the light of the warning given by the tradition, “Whoever knowingly 
tells a lie concerning me should prepare for a seat in Hell-fire.” Since they remained 
silent  concerning  this  report,  they  accepted  it,  in  effect  joined  Jabir,  and  confirmed 
him. 

T h i r d  E x a m p l e : Again as related in the accurate books of Hadith and 
foremost  Bukhari  and  Muslim,  Jabir  reported:  “During  the  Buwat  expedition,  the 
Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)    commanded:  ‘Call  for  the 
ablutions!’ They said there was no water. He said, ‘Find a small amount!’ We brought 
a  very  small  amount.  He  held  his  hand  over  the  water  while  reciting  something  I 
could not hear, and then commanded: ‘Bring the caravan’s big trough!’ They brought 
it  to  me  and  I  placed  it  before  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP).  He  put  his  hands  in  the 
trough  and  spread  his  fingers.  I  poured  that  very  small  amount  of  water  onto  his 
blessed  hands,  and  I  saw  that  abundant  water  was  flowing  from  his  blessed  fingers 
and filling the trough. Then I summoned those who needed water. When they had all 
performed the ablutions with the water and drunk from it, I told the Noble Messenger 
(UWBP) that there was no one else. He lifted his hands, leaving the trough full to the 
brim.”117 

This  clear  miracle  of  Muhammad  (UWBP)  has  the  certainty  of  ‘consensus  in 
meaning,’ for since Jabir was prominent in the matter, he had the right to recount it 
and proclaim it in everyone else’s name. Ibn Mas‘ud relates exactly the same thing in 
his narration: “I saw water flowing from the fingers of God’s Messenger (Upon whom 
be  blessings  and  peace)  as  from  a  spring.”118  If  a  truthful,  well-known  group  of 
Companions composed of Anas, Jabir, and Ibn Mas‘ud said: “We have seen it,” is it 
possible that they should not have seen it? Now combine these three examples and see 
how powerful and manifest a miracle it was, and how, if the three  

                                                 
116 Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; Maghazi, 35; Tafsir Sura al-Fath, 5; Ashriba, 31; Muslim, ‘Imara, 72, 73; 
Musnad, iii, 329; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, viii, 110. 
117 Muslim, Zuhd, 74, no: 3013; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, viii, 159. 
118 Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; Tirmidhi (Tahqiq: Ahmad Shakir), no: 3637; Darimi, 
Muqaddima, 5. 

 

152

chains of transmission are combined, it proves the flowing of water from his fingers 
like ‘true consensus.’ Indeed, even Moses’ making water flow from twelve different 
places  in  a  rock  cannot  be  equated  with  the  water  flowing  from  Muhammad’s  ten 
fingers, for water may gush out of rock – examples are commonplace – but there is no 
equivalent  of,  no  parallel  for,  water  flowing  in  abundance,  like  from  the  Spring  of 
Kawthar, from flesh and bone. 

F  o  u  r  t  h    E  x  a  m  p  l  e  :  Foremost  Imam  Malik  in  his  esteemed  book, 
Muwatta’, relates from the renowned Companion Mu‘adh b. Jabal: “During the Tabuk 
expedition we came across a spring flowing as meagrely as a piece of fine string. The 
Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  ordered:  ‘Collect a  little  of 
the  water!’  They  collected  some  in  the  palms  of  their  hands.  God’s  Messenger 
(UWBP) washed his hands and face in it, and we returned it to the spring. Suddenly 
the  outlet  of  the  spring  opened  up  and  water  gushed  forth;  it  was  sufficient  for  the 
whole army.” 

Another narrator, even, Imam Ibn Ishaq, stated: “The water gushed forth from the 
spring  under  the  earth  making  a  roar  like  thunder.  God’s  Noble  Messenger  told 
Mu‘adh:  ‘If  you  live  long  enough,  you  will  see  that  this  miraculous  water  will 
transform this place into gardens.’119 And so it did.” 

F  i  f  t  h   E x a  m p  l  e  : Foremost  Bukhari  relates  from  al-Bara’, and Muslim 
from  Salama  b.  Akwa‘,  and  other  authentic  books  of  Hadith  from  other  narrators, 
unanimously relate: “During the  Hudaybiyya expedition we came across a well. We 
numbered four hundred while the water in the well was barely sufficient for fifty. We 
drew  the  water  and  left  nothing.  Then  God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings 
and peace) came and sat at the head of the well. He asked for a bucket of water and 
we  fetched one.  He put some of  his  blessed  spittle  into  the  bucket  and prayed,  then 
poured  the  water  into  the  well.  Suddenly  the  well  gushed  and  frothed  with  water, 
filling to the top. The whole army drank their fill and watered their animals. They also 
replenished their water-bags.”120 

S i x t h  E x a m p l e : Again, foremost brilliant authorities of the science of 
Hadith like Muslim and Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, and the authentic books of Hadith, relate 
from a sound narration from the famous Abu Qatada: “During the celebrated Battle of 
Mu’ta we were going for help when the leaders were martyred. I had a water-bag with 
me. The Noble Messenger  

                                                 
119 Muwatta’, Safar, 2; Musnad, ii, 308, 323; v, 228, 237; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, viii, 167; Bayhaqi, Dala’il 
al-Nubuwwa, ii, 64; v, 236. 
120 Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; Maghazi, 35; Musnad, iv, 290, 301; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, iv, 110. 

 

153

(UWBP) commanded: ‘Keep your water-bag carefully; there will be great need for it.’ 
Soon after, we began to suffer from thirst. We were seventy-two men. (According to 
Tabari, three  hundred.) The Messenger (UWBP)  said:  ‘Bring  me  your  water-bag!’  I 
did so. He took the bag and placed his lips on its mouth. I do not know whether or not 
he blew into it. Then seventy-two men came and drank from the bag and filled their 
bags. When I took it back, it was just as I had given it.”121 

See  this decisive  miracle of  Muhammad  (UWBP)  and  say:  “O  God!  Grant  him 

blessings and peace to the number of drops of water, and to his Family!” 

S  e  v  e  n  t  h    E  x  a  m  p  l  e :  The  authentic  books  and  foremost  Bukhari  and 
Muslim  narrate  from  ‘Imran  b.  Husain:  “On  one  journey  we  and  God’s  Messenger 
(Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  were  without  water.  He  said  to  me  and  ‘Ali: 
‘There is a woman  in  such-and-such a place together with her beast, which  is  laden 
with  two  full  water-bags.  Go  and  fetch  her!’  ‘Ali  and  I  went  and found  the  woman 
and  the  water  in  exactly  the  place  described,  and  brought  her  to  God’s  Messenger 
(UWBP).  He  ordered:  ‘Pour  a  little  of  the  water  into  a  vessel.’  We  did  so  and  he 
prayed for the blessing of increase. He then commanded everyone to come to fill his 
water-bag. All the men came, drank, and filled their water-bags. Afterwards he gave 
an order to collect something for the woman, and they filled her skirt.” ‘Imran said: “I 
imagined  the  two  water-bags  were  constantly  filling.  The  Noble  Messenger  (Upon 
whom  be blessings  and  peace)  told  the  woman: ‘You  can  go  now.  We  did  not  take 
water from you; rather God gave us water from His treasury.’”122 

E i g h t h  E x a m p l e : Scholars of Hadith,  primarily Ibn Khuzayma  in his 
Sahih, narrate from ‘Umar: “We ran out of water during the Tabuk expedition. Some 
people even slaughtered their camels, wrung out the innards and drank the liquid. Abu 
Bakr  the  Veracious  requested  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and 
peace) to pray. The Messenger (UWBP) raised his hands, and before he had lowered 
them clouds gathered, and such rain fell that we  filled our containers. Then the rain 
stopped,  and  it  had  not  fallen  beyond  the  limits  of  the  army.”123  That  is  to  say,  no 
chance  was  involved  in  the  incident;  it  was  purely  a  miracle  of  Muhammad  (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace). 

                                                 
121 Muslim, Masajid, 311. 
122 Bukhari, Tayammum, 6; Manaqib, 25; Muslim, Masajid, 312; Musnad, iv, 434-5; Bayhaqi, Dala’il 
al-Nubuwwa, iv, 216; vi, 130. 
123 al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, vi, 194; al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, xii, 353; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, 
i, 190; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 600; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 63; Suyuti, al-Khasa’is 
al-Kubra, ii, 105. 

 

154

N  i  n  t  h    E  x  a  m  p  l  e  :  Relating  from  ‘Amr  b.  Shu‘ayb,  the  grandson  of 
‘Abdullah  b.  ‘Amr  b.  al-‘As,  on  whom  they  relied  for  explanations  of  Hadiths,  the 
Four  Imams  narrated  –  from  a  sound  narration:  “Before  his  prophetic  mission,  the 
Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) once came by camel with his 
uncle Abu Talib to the place called Dhu’l-Hijaz near ‘Arafat. Abu Talib said he was 
thirsty.  The  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  dismounted  from  the 
camel  and  struck  the  ground  with  his  foot.  Water  gushed  out  and  Abu  Talib  drank 
from it.”124 

One  of  the  researchers,  however,  stated  that  this  incident  should be included  in 
the  category  of  irhasat,125  for  it  occurred  before  his  prophethood.  But  since  ever 
afterwards the spring of ‘Arafat flowed from the spot, it may be considered a wonder 
of Muhammad (UWBP). 

Similar  to  these  nine  examples,  ninety  different  narrations  –  if  not  ninety 
instances – have reported miracles concerning water. The first seven examples are as 
sound and definite as ‘consensus in meaning.’ For sure the last two are not supported 
by  the  narrations  of  numerous  narrators  or  a  strong  chain  of  transmitters,  but 
supporting and confirming the incident mentioned in the eighth example as  narrated 
by  ‘Umar,  is  another  miracle  reported  by  the  authentic  books  of  Hadith,  including 
Bayhaqi and al-Hakim; it is as follows:  

“‘Umar  requested  of  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (UWBP)  that  he  should  pray  for 
rain,  because  the  army  was  in  need  of  water.  The  Messenger  (UWBP)  raised  his 
hands,  and  at once  clouds  gathered  and  rain  fell,  enough  for  the  army’s  needs,  then 
they  dispersed.”126  It  was  quite  simply  as  though  they  were  officials  charged  with 
watering the army; they came, poured down sufficient for its needs, then went.  

This  narration corroborates the eighth example and proves it decisively. So too, 
the  famous learned scholar, Ibn al-Jawzi, who was extremely  fastidious in  verifying 
Hadiths  even  rejecting  as  spurious  many  authentic  ones,  said  that  this  event  took 
place, but at the famous Battle of Badr.127 He said that it  is referred to by the  verse, 
“And He  caused rain to descend on  you from heaven to clean  you therewith.”(8:11) 
Since that is the case, no doubt can remain concerning its certainty. Furthermore, rain 
fell on many occa 

                                                 
124 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 290; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 29; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 
15-20. See also, Bukhari, Istisqa, 3; Musnad, ii, 93. 
125 For irhasat, see definition on page     (Tr.) 
126 al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 128; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 601; Suyuti, al-Durar al-
Manthur, iii, 170. 
127 Ibn al-Jawzi, Zad al-Masir, iii, 328. 

 

155

sions when the Prophet (UWBP) prayed for it,  suddenly, swiftly, before he lowered 
his  hands;  it  was  on  its  own  a  miracle  about  which  the  reports  are unanimous.  It  is 
also  narrated unanimously  that  several  times  he  raised  his  hands  while  in  the  pulpit 
and that rain fell before he lowered them.128 

NINTH SIGN 
One  of  the  various  kinds  of  miracles  of  God’s  Most  Noble  Messenger  (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace) is that like human beings, trees obeyed his orders, and 
moving  from  their  places,  came  to  him.  There  is  also  ‘consensus  in  meaning’ 
concerning the reports of these miracles, like those of water flowing from his fingers. 
They have been narrated in numerous forms and through numerous channels. Indeed, 
the  consensus  concerning  trees  leaving  their  places  and  coming  to  him  may  be 
regarded  as  clear  and  unambiguous,129  because  the  best-known  of  the  Companions 
such  as  ‘Ali,  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Ibn  Mas‘ud,  Ibn  ‘Umar,  Ya‘la  b.  Murra,  Jabir,  Anas  b. 
Malik, Burayda, Usama b. Zayd, and Ghaylan b. Salama all reported the same miracle 
with certainty. Hundreds of scholars of the succeeding generation narrated the miracle 
from  one  of  the  above-mentioned  Companions  through  a  different  line  of 
transmission, as though transmitting it to us in the form of ‘multiple consensus.‘ Thus, 
this miracle of the trees has decisively and indisputably the certainty of ‘consensus in 
meaning.’ We will now cite only a few examples of it, although it was repeated many 
times. 

F i r s t  E x a m p l e : Foremost, Imam Maja, and al-Darimi narrate from Anas 
b. Malik and ‘Ali, and Imam Bayhaqi from ‘Umar, that the Noble Messenger (Upon 
whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  was  saddened  at  the  denial  of  the  unbelievers.  He 
prayed:  “O  my  Sustainer!  Give  me  a  sign  that  I  shall  no  longer  see  anyone  who 
contradicts  me!”130  According  to  Anas,  Gabriel  was  also  present,  upon  whose 
instruction God’s Messenger (UWBP) called to a tree at the side of the valley. It came 
near him. He then told the tree to go back; it returned and settled itself in its place. 

S e c o n d  E x a m p l e : In al-Shifa’ al-Sharif, Qadi Iyad, the leading scholar of 
the Maghrib, relates from ‘Abdullah b. ‘Umar through an exalted and sound chain of 
narrators:  “On  one  expedition,  a  beduin  approached  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace). God’s Messenger  

                                                 
128 Bukhari, Istisqa, 3, 6, 10, 12, 13, 21; Muslim, Istisqa, 8-10; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, vi, 139-
46. 
129 Kattani, Nazm al-Mutanathir, 137. 
130 Ibn Maja, Fitan, 23, no: 4028; Darimi, Muqaddima, 3; Musnad, i, 223; iii, 113; iv, 177; Qadi Iyad, 
al-Shifa’, i, 302; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 620; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 10; al-
Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, ii, 354. 

 

156

(UWBP)  asked  him:  ‘Where  are  you  going?’  He  replied:  ‘To  my  family.’  God’s 
Messenger  asked  him:  ‘Don’t  you  want  something  better  than  that?’  The  beduin 
asked: ‘What is that?’ The Messenger (UWBP) said: ‘That you bear witness that there 
is no god but God, He is One, He has no partner, and that Muhammad is His servant 
and  Messenger.’  The  beduin  asked:  ‘What  is  witness  to  this  testimony?’  God’s 
Messenger (UWBP) said: ‘The tree beside the valley shall bear witness.’” Ibn ‘Umar 
said:  “Shaking,  the  tree  cleft  the  earth  and  came  to  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP).  He 
asked the tree three times to testify; each time it testified to his truthfulness. When he 
ordered, it went back and settled in its place.”131 

According  to  the  authentic  narration  of  Ibn  Sahib  al-Aslami,  Burayda  reports: 
“When we were with the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) on 
an expedition, a beduin came and asked for a sign, that is, a miracle. The Messenger 
(UWBP) said: ‘Tell that tree that God’s Messenger summons it!’ Then he pointed to a 
tree;  it  swayed  to  right  and  left,  heaved  itself  out  of  the  ground  with  its  roots,  and 
came to the Messenger (UWBP), saying: ‘Peace be upon you, O Messenger of God!’ 
The beduin said: ‘Now let it go back to its place!’ He commanded, and it went. Then 
the beduin said: ‘Allow me to prostrate before you.’ The Messenger (UWBP) replied: 
‘No one is permitted  to do  that.’ The  beduin  said: ‘Then  I  will  kiss  your  hands  and 
feet,’ and he permitted him.”1132 

T h i r d  E x a m p l e : Foremost the Sahih of Muslim, and the authentic books 
of  Hadith  relate  that  Jabir  said:  “We  were  together  with  God’s  Noble  Messenger 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) on an expedition when he searched for a place 
to  answer  the  call of  nature. There was  nowhere  secluded.  So  he  went  towards  two 
trees, caught hold of the branches of one of them, and pulled. Obeying him, the tree 
went together with him to the second tree. It was like an obedient camel being led by 
its  reins.  Having  in  this  way  brought  the  two  trees  together,  he  said:  ‘Join  together 
over me, with God’s permission!’ The two trees joined together and formed a screen. 
After relieving himself behind them, he ordered them to go back, and they returned to 
their places.”133  

According  to  another  narration,  Jabir  said:  “God’s  Messenger  (UWBP) 

commanded me: ‘Tell those trees to join together for the relief of God’s  

                                                 
131 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 298; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 615; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, vi, 
14; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 292; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, vi, 125; al-
‘Asqalani, al-Matalib al-‘Aliya, iv, 16 no: 3836; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 620; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 
viii, 150. 
132 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 299; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 49. 
133 Muslim, Zuhd 74, no: 3012. 

 

157

Messenger!’ I told them to do so and they joined together. Then, while I was waiting, 
God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) emerged, and indicated to left 
and right with his head. The two trees returned to their places.”134 

F  o  u  r  t  h    E  x  a  m  p  l  e  :  Usama  b.  Zayd,  one  the  brave  commanders  and 
servants of the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace), reports in an 
authentic  narration:  “We  were  together  with  God’s  Messenger  on  an  expedition. 
There was no secluded, private place in which to answer the call of nature. He asked: 
‘Can you see any trees or rocks?’ I replied: ‘Yes, I can.’ He ordered: ‘Speak to them 
and tell them to join together for the relief of God’s Messenger; also tell the rocks to 
gather  together  as  a  wall.’  I  went  and  said  as  he  commanded.  I  swear  that  the  trees 
joined  together  and  the  rocks  formed  a  wall.  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  after 
relieving himself, again commanded: ‘Tell them to separate!’ I swear by the Glorious 
One in the grasp of whose power I am that the trees and rocks separated, and returned 
to their places.”135 

These two incidents, which were reported by Jabir and Usama, were also reported 
by Ya‘la b. Murra, Ghaylan b. Salama al-Thaqafi, and Ibn Mas‘ud, but as referring to 
the Battle of Hunayn.136 

F i f t h  E x a m p l e : Reported by Imam b. Fawrak, known for his excellence 
in  interpretation  as  the  foremost  scholar  of  his  time  and  the  second  Shafi‘i:  “While 
travelling on horseback one night during the Ta’if expedition, sleep overcame God’s 
Noble Messenger (UWBP). While in that state a lote-tree loomed up before him. To 
make  way  for  him  and  not  to  hurt  his  horse,  the  tree  split  in  two,  and  the  Noble 
Messenger (UWBP) passed between the two parts of the tree on the horse.” The tree 
has remained with two trunks, in that honoured position, up to our time.137 

S i x t h  E x a m p l e : Ya‘la b. Murra relates in an authentic narration: “During 
an  expedition,  a  tree  –  called  either  talha  or  samura  –  came,  passed  around  God’s 
Noble Messenger (UWBP) as if circumambulating, and went back to its place. God’s 
Messenger (UWBP) said: ‘The tree requested of God that it should salute me.’”138 

                                                 
134 Darimi, Muqaddima, 4; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 299; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 616; al-Khafaji, 
Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 51. 
135 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 300; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 617-9; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 
51; al-‘Asqalani, al-Matalib al-‘Aliya, iv, 8-10, no: 3830. 
136 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 301; al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, xii, 403. 
137 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 301; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 619; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’,  iii, 57. 
138 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 301; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 619; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 53; 
al-Haythami, Majma’ al Zawa’id, ix, 6-7; Musnad, iv, 170, 172; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 617. 

 

158

S e v e n t h  E x a m p l e : Scholars of Hadith relate from Ibn Mas‘ud with an 
authentic narration: “When, seeking guidance, the jinn of Nusaybin came to the Noble 
Messenger (UWBP)  in  the  place  called  Batn  al-Nakhl,  a  tree  informed  him  of  their 
coming.” Also, Imam Mujahid relates from Ibn Mas‘ud in the same Hadith: “The jinn 
asked for a proof of his prophethood, so the Noble Messenger (UWBP) commanded 
the tree, and it  left its place, came to him, then returned to its place.”139 That single 
miracle  was  sufficient  for  the  race  of  jinns.  So  if  a  human  being  does  not  come  to 
believe  having  heard of  a  thousand  miracles  like  this  one,  is  he  not  more of  a devil 
than those described by the jinn as, “Some foolish ones among us”?140 

E i g h t h  E x a m p l e : Tirmidhi reports in his Sahih from Ibn ‘Abbas through 
a sound line of transmission: “God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and 
peace) asked a beduin: ‘Will you testify that I am the Messenger of God if a branch of 
that tree comes to me when I call to it?’ He replied: ‘Yes.’ The Messenger (UWBP) 
called to the branch. It broke off and jumped over near him, then jumped back when 
he told it to do so.”141 

There  are  many  other  examples  similar  to  these  eight  that  are  narrated  through 
many chains of transmission. Seven or eight strands of rope form a strong cable when 
they are put together. Similarly, the miracles related to trees, which were reported on 
the  authority  of  the  best-known  and  most  veracious  Companions  in  thus  numerous 
chains of transmission, certainly have the strength of ‘consensus in meaning,‘ indeed, 
‘true consensus.’ In fact, they take on the form of ‘consensus’ when passed down by 
the  Companions  to  the  following  generation.  In  particular,  the  accurate  books  of 
Hadith such as Bukhari, Muslim, Ibn Hibban, and Tirmidhi, ensured that the chains of 
authorities leading back to the time of the Companions were so sound, and they kept 
them thus, that reading  a  Hadith, say  in  Bukhari, is  like  hearing  it directly  from the 
Companions.  

If, as seen in the above examples, trees recognize God’s Messenger (Upon whom 
be blessings and peace) testify to his prophethood, visit and salute him, and obey his 
orders, aren’t those lifeless, unreasoning creatures who call themselves human beings 
yet do not recognize him or believe in  

                                                 
139 Bukhari, Manaqib al-Ansar, 32 (Bab: Dhikr al-Jinn); Muslim, Salat, 150; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-
Shifa’, i, 619. 
140 Qur’an, 72:4. 
141 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi, no: 3707; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-
Zawa’id, ix, 10. 

 

159

him, more worthless than a dead tree? Do they  not resemble pieces of wood, fit  for 
the fire?  

TENTH SIGN 

Corroborating  the  miracles  concerning  trees  and  reported  in  the  form  of 
‘consensus,’ is the miracle of the moaning of the pole. Yes, the pole’s moaning in the 
Prophet’s (UWBP) mosque before a vast crowd because of its temporary separation 
from  him  both  confirms  and  corroborates  the  instances  of  miracles  related  to  trees. 
For the pole also was of wood; their substance was the same. However, although there 
is a consensus of opinion concerning the reports of this miracle, the other miracles are 
unanimously  agreed  upon  only  as  a  class;  there  is  mostly  no  clear  consensus  about 
them individually or as separate instances. 

When  delivering  the  sermon  in  the  mosque,  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (UWBP) 
used to lean against a pole consisting of a date-palm. But when the pulpit was made, 
he began to give the sermon from there. Whereupon the pole moaned and wailed like 
a  camel;  the  whole  congregation  heard  it.  Only  when  the  God’s  Messenger  (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace) came down from the pulpit, and placed his hand on it, 
speaking  to  it  and  consoling  it,  did  the  pole  stop  moaning.142  This  miracle  of 
Muhammad  (UWBP)  was  narrated  through  numerous  chains  of  transmission,  and 
there was agreement concerning it. 

Indeed, the miracle of the moaning of the pole is very widely known and there is 
‘true  consensus  (hakikî  mütevatir)’  concerning  it.143  Hundreds  of  authorities  on 
Hadith  of  the  subsequent  generation  narrated  the  miracle  through  fifteen  chains  of 
transmission144  from  an  illustrious  group  of  Companions,  and  passed  it  down  to 
succeeding centuries. From that group, eminent scholars among the Companions and 
leading experts on Hadith such as Anas b. Malik145 and Jabir b. ‘Abdullah al-Ansari146 
–  both  servants  of  the  Prophet  (UWBP),  ‘Abdullah  b.  ‘Umar,147  ‘Abdullah  b. 
‘Abbas,148 Sahl  

                                                 
142 Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; Jum’a, 26; Ibn Maja, Iqama, 199; Nasa’i, Jum’a, 17; Tirmidhi, Jum’a, 10; 
Manaqib, 6; Darimi, Muqaddima, 6; Salat, 202; Musnad, i, 249. 
143 See, al-Kattani, Nazm al-Mutanathir, 134-5. 
144 Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, 125-132. 
145 Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; Jum’a, 10; Ibn Maja, Iqamat al-Salat, 199; Darimi, 
Muqaddima, 6; Salat, 202; Musnad, i, 249, 267, 363; iii, 226. 
146 Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; Jum’a, 10; Nasa’i, Jum’a, 17; Ibn Maja, Iqamat al-
Salat, 199; Darimi, Muqaddima, 6 (3 different lines from Jabir); Salat, 202; Musnad, iii, 293, 295, 306, 
324. 
147 Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; Tirmidhi, Jum^a, 10; Tirmidhi (Tahqiq: Ahmad Shakir), no: 505; Manaqib, 
6; Darimi, Muqaddima, 6. 
148 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; Jum’a, 10; Darimi, Muqaddima, 6; Salat, 202; Musnad, i, 249, 363. 

 

160

b. Sa‘d,149 Abu Sa‘id al-Khudri,150 Ubayy b. Ka‘b,151 Burayda,152 and Umm Salama, 
the Mother of Believers,153 each at the head of a chain of transmission, reported this 
same miracle to the Prophet’s (UWBP) community. Foremost Bukhari, Muslim, and 
the  authentic  books  of  Hadith  gave  accounts  of  this  great  miracle,  which  were 
unanimously  accepted,  together  with  its  lines  of  transmission  for  succeeding 
generations. 

Jabir,  in  his  chain  of  transmission,  says:  “God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings and peace) used to lean against a wooden pole called the palm trunk while 
delivering  the  sermon  in  the  mosque.  The  pole  could  not  endure  it  when  the  pulpit 
was made and the Messenger (UWBP) used that for the sermon, and it began to moan 
and wail like a pregnant camel.” In his narration, Anas says: “It moaned like a water-
buffalo  causing  the  mosque  to  tremble.”  In  his  narration,  Sahl  b.  Sa‘d  says:  “The 
people  started  weeping  and  crying  when  the  pole  was  moaning.”  In  his  narration, 
Ubayy  b.  Ka‘b  says:  “It  wept  so  much  it  split.”  While  in  another  narration,154  the 
Noble Messenger (UWBP) said: “It is weeping at being separated from the recitation 
of  God’s  names  and  the  mentioning  of  God  during  the  sermon.”  Still  another 
narration155 reports that God’s Messenger (UWBP) said: “If  I had not embraced and 
consoled  it,  it  would  have  wept  until  Doomsday  at  being  separated  from  God’s 
Messenger.” In his narration, Burayda reports: “When the pole began to moan, God’s 
Messenger (UWBP) put his hand on it and said, ‘If you wish, I will return you to the 
grove  you came  from;  your roots will  grow and you will flourish;  you will produce 
new fruits. Or if you wish, I will plant you in Paradise, and God’s friends, the saints, 
will  eat  of  your  fruit.’  He  then  listened  to  the  pole.  The  people  behind  God’s 
Messenger  (UWBP)  could  hear  it  as  it  spoke,  saying:  ‘Plant  me  in  Paradise,  where 
there is no decay, so that Almighty God’s beloved servants may eat of my fruit.’ The 
Messenger  (UWBP)  said:  ‘I  will,’  and  added:  ‘It  has  preferred  the  eternal  realm  to 
that  of  transitoriness.’”  Abu  Ishaq Isfarani,  one  of  the  great  authorities  on  theology, 
narrated: “God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) did not go to the 
pole, but it came to him, at his com 

                                                 
149 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; Jum’a, 10; Darimi, Muqaddima, 6; Salat, 202; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 
62. 
150 Darimi, Muqaddima, 6. 
151 Tirmidhi, Jum’a, 10; Ibn Maja, Iqamat al-Salat, 199; Darimi, Muqaddima, 6; Musnad, 139; al-
Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa, iii, 62; al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi, iii, 22. 
152 Darimi, Muqaddima, 6. 
153 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; Jum’a, 10. 
154 See, Bukhari, Manaqib, 25. 
155 See, Darimi, Muqaddima, 6. 

 

161

mand. Then, at his command, it returned to its place.”156 Ubayy b. Ka‘b says: “After 
this  extraordinary  event,  God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace) 
ordered that the pole be put under the pulpit. It was put there and remained there until 
the  mosque  was  pulled  down  before being  rebuilt.  Then  Ubayy  b. Ka‘b  took  it  and 
kept it until it decayed.157 

The  famous scholar  Hasan  al-Basri  would  weep  while  teaching  this  miraculous 
event  to  his  students,  and  say  to  them:  “A  piece  of  wood  demonstrated  love  and 
longing  for  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace),  so  you 
should feel more love than that.”158 As for us, we say, Yes, and love and longing for 
him is shown through following his illustrious Practices (Sunna) and sacred Shari‘a. 

A n  I m p o r t a n t  P o i n t 

If  it  is  asked  :  Why  were  the  miracles  that  were  displayed  in  connection  with 
food  –  to  satisfy  fully  a  thousand  men  with  four  handfuls  of  food  in  the  Battle  of 
Khandaq,  and  another  thousand  men  with  water  flowing  from  the  Messenger’s 
(UWBP)  blessed  fingers  –  not  narrated  through  numerous  chains  of transmission  as 
the  miracle  of  the  moaning  of  the  pole  was,  although  the  former  two  miracles 
occurred in the presence of larger crowds? 

The  Answer:  The  miracles  that  were  manifested  were  of  two  kinds:  one  were 
manifested at the hands of God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) in 
order to make people assent to his prophethood. The moaning of the pole was of that 
kind.  It  occurred  solely  as  a  proof,  an  affirmation,  of  prophethood,  to  increase  the 
believers’ faith, to urge the dissemblers to sincerity and belief, and to bring to belief 
the  unbelievers.  That  is  why  everyone,  the  low  and  the  high,  saw  it,  and  great 
attention  was  paid  to  broadcasting  it.  However,  the  miracles  concerning  food  and 
water  were  wonders  rather  than miracles, or divine  favours  rather  than  wonders, or, 
more than favour, they were banquets bestowed by the All-Merciful One because of 
need. For sure, they were proofs of his claim to prophethood and miracles, but their 
basic  aim  was  this:  the  army  was  hungry  so  Almighty  God  provided  a  feast  for  a 
thousand  men  out of  a handful  of  food  from  His  treasury  in  the  Unseen,  just  as  He 
creates a thousand pounds of dates from a single seed. And for a thirsty army fighting 
in His way, He caused water to flow like the water of Kawthar from the fingers of its 
Commander-in-Chief, and gave them to drink. 

                                                 
156 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 304 
157 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 304; Ibn Maja, Iqamat al-Salat, 199; Darimi, Muqaddima, 6. 
158 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 305. 

 

162

It  is  for  this  reason  that  all  the  examples  of  the  miracles  concerning  food  and 
water do not attain the degree of the miracle of the moaning of the pole. However, in 
their  entirety,  the  various  kinds  of  those  two  miracles  are  as  numerous  and 
unanimously reported as the moaning of the pole. Moreover, not everyone could see 
the  increase  of  food  and  water  flowing  from  his  fingers;  they  could  only  see  the 
results. Whereas everyone heard the pole moaning, so it was more widely broadcast. 

If it is asked:  All the actions and conduct of God’s Messenger (Upon whom be 
blessings and peace) were recorded and transmitted by his Companions with extreme 
care. Why then were such great miracles only narrated through ten or twenty chains of 
transmission,  when  they  should  have  been  narrated  through  a  hundred?  Also,  why 
were  many  narrated  from  Anas,  Jabir,  and  Abu Hurayra,  and  few  related  from  Abu 
Bakr and ‘Umar? 

The  Answer:  The  answer  to the  first  part of  the  question  has  been  given  in  the 
Third Principle in the Fourth Sign. Regarding the second part: just as someone in need 
of  medicine  goes  to  a  doctor,  mathematicians  are  consulted  on  mathematical 
problems, and questions to do with the Shari‘a are asked of the Mufti, and so on; so 
too,  some  of  the  scholars  among  the  Companions  were  charged  with  the  duty  of 
instructing succeeding centuries in the Hadiths of the Prophet, working with all their 
strength for this end. Yes, Abu Hurayra devoted his entire life to memorizing Hadiths, 
while  ‘Umar  was  occupied  with  the  world  of  politics  and  the  caliphate.  ‘Umar 
therefore narrated very few traditions, relying on persons like Abu Hurayra, Anas, and 
Jabir, to teach the Hadiths to the Muslim community. Furthermore, on a well-known, 
truthful,  sincere,  honest,  and  trusted  Companion  reporting  an  incident  through  one 
chain, it was regarded as sufficient, and no need remained for anyone else to narrate 
it. This is why some significant events were narrated through only two or three chains 
of transmission. 

ELEVENTH SIGN 

As the Tenth Sign explained miracles of the Prophet (UWBP) related to trees, the 
eleventh  Sign  will  describe  how  rocks  and  mountains  among  lifeless  creatures  also 
demonstrated prophetic miracles. Here we cite a few instances out of many. 

F i r s t  E x a m p l e : The great scholar of the Maghrib, Qadi Iyad, in his al-
Shifa’ al-Sharif, with a celebrated chain of authorities, and great imams like Bukhari 
report  through  an  authentic  line  of  transmission,  from  Ibn  Mas‘ud,  the  Prophet’s 
(UWBP) servant: “While eating together with  

 

163

God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be blessings  and  peace),  we  used  to  hear the 
food glorifying God.”159 

S e c o n d  E x a m p l e : Accurate books of Hadith report from Anas and Abu 
Dharr  through  an  authentic  line  of  transmission:  “Anas,  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP) 
servant,  said:  ‘We  were  together  with  God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings 
and peace) when he took up a handful of small stones and they began to praise God in 
his blessed palm. Then he put them in Abu Bakr the Veracious’s hand and again they 
glorified  God.’”160  In  his  line  of transmission, Abu Dharr  al-Ghifari  says:  “Then  he 
put them into ‘Umar’s hand, and again they glorified God. Then he took them and put 
them on the ground, and they were silent. Then he again took them, and put them in 
‘Uthman’s hand, where again they began to glorify God.” Abu Dharr and Anas relate: 
“He put them in our hands and they were silent.”161 

T h i r d  E x a m p l e : It is established by a sound report from ‘Ali, Jabir, and 
‘A’isha  al-Siddiqa:  “Rocks  and  mountains  would  say  to  God’s  Messenger  (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace), ‘Peace be upon you, O Messenger of God!’” In ‘Ali’s 
chain of narration, it says: “Whenever we went around in the environs of Mecca in the 
early of days of his prophethood, the trees and rocks we encountered would declare: 
‘Peace  be  upon  you,  O  Messenger  of  God!’”162  While  in  his  chain  of  transmission, 
Jabir  says:  “Whenever  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace) 
came across rocks and trees, they would prostrate before him, that  is, demonstrating 
obedience to him, they would declare: ‘Peace be upon you, O Messenger of God!’”163 
In one of Jabir’s narrations, the Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) said: 
“I know a rock that salutes me.”164 Some people said that he intended the Black Stone 
of  the  Ka‘ba.  In  her  line  of  transmission,  ‘A’isha  said:  “God’s  Messenger  (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace) said: ‘When Gabriel brought me the message, I would 
never pass by a rock or a tree without it saying, ‘Peace be upon you, O Messenger of 
God!’”165 

                                                 
159 Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6 (Tahqiq: Ibrahim A’wad) no: 3633; Musnad, i, 460; 
Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa, i, 306; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 627; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, vi, 
97-8, 133. 
160 Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 306; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 70; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 627. 
161 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 306; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, v, 179; vii, 298-9; Ibn Kathir, al-
Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, vi, 132-3. 
162 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; Darimi, Muqaddima, 4; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 260; al-
Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 607; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 628. 
163 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 307; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 71 
164 Muslim, Fada’il, 2; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 5; Musnad, v, 89, 95, 105; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, viii, 139. 
165 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 307; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 71; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, 
viii, 259. 

 

164

F o u r t h  E x a m p l e :  Reported through an authentic line of narrators from 
‘Abbas:  “God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  covered  ‘Abbas  and  his  four  sons  (‘Abdullah, 
‘Ubaydullah, Fadl, and Qusam) with a piece of cloth called mula’at, praying: ‘O my 
Sustainer! This is my uncle; protect through me these his sons and veil them from the 
Fire,  as  I  veil  them  with  this  cloth!’166  The  roof,  door,  and  the  walls  of  the  house 
joined in the prayer at once, saying, Amen! Amen!”167 

F  i  f  t  h    E  x  a  m  p  l  e  :  Accurate  books,  notably  Bukhari,  Ibn  Hibban,  Abu 
Da’ud,  and  Tirmidhi,  unanimously  report  from  Anas,168  Abu  Hurayra,169  ‘Uthman 
Dhi’n-Nurayn,170 and Sa‘d b. Zayd,171 from among the ten promised Paradise: “God’s 
Noble  Messenger  (UWBP)  climbed Mount  Uhud  together  with  Abu  Bakr  al-Siddiq, 
‘Umar al-Faruq, and ‘Uthman Dhi’n-Nurayn. Either due to their awesomeness, or out 
of  its  own  joy  and  happiness,  the  mountain  began  to  tremble  and  stir.  God’s 
Messenger said:  ‘Steady!  For upon  you  are  a prophet,  a  veracious one  (siddiq),  and 
two martyrs!’ 

This  tradition  is  giving  news  from  the  Unseen  that  ‘Umar  and  ‘Uthman  were 
going to be martyred. As a supplement to this tradition, it is narrated that when God’s 
Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) migrated from Mecca pursued 
by  the  unbelievers,  they  climbed  the  mountain  called  Thubir.  The  mountain  said: 
“Leave me, O Messenger of God! I am afraid that God will punish me if they strike 
you on me.” Then Mount Hira called to him: “Come to me, O Messenger of God!”172 
For this reason, men of intuition feel fear on Mount Thubir and a sense of safety on 
Mount Hira. 

As  can  be  understood  from  this  example,  these  vast  mountains  are  each  an 
individual servant of God; each glorifies and praises Him; each is charged with duties. 
They recognized and loved God’s Messenger (UWBP); they are not without purpose 
or owner. 

S i x t h  E x a m p l e : Reported through an authentic line of transmission from 
‘Abdullah b. ‘Umar: “While delivering the sermon from the pulpit, God’s Messenger 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) recited the  verse: “No just estimate  have they 
made of God, such as is due to Him: on  

                                                 
166 Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, vi, 71. 
167 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa, i, 608; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 628; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 309;  al-
Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 269-70. 
168 See, Bukhari, Fada’il al-Ashab, 5, 6, 7; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 19, no: 3697; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 9 
(Bab: Fi’l-Khulafa). 
169 Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 6, no: 2417; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 19. 
170 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 19. 
171 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 19; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 450. 
172 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 308; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 75. 

 

165

the Day of Judgement the whole earth will be but His handful, and the heavens will be 
rolled up in His right hand,”(39:67) and said: ‘God the Compeller is exalting Himself 
and saying: I am the Compeller! I am the Compeller! I am the Mighty! I am the Most 
High!’ As he said this, the pulpit so trembled and shook that we were frightened that 
God’s Messenger (UWBP) would fall.”173 

S e v e n t h  E x a m p l e :  It is reported through an authentic line of narrators 
from  Ibn  ‘Abbas,174  known  as  the  Learned  One  of  the  Muslim  Community  and 
Interpreter of the Qur’an, and Ibn Mas‘ud,175 the Prophet’s (UWBP) servant and one 
of the great scholars of the Companions, that they said: “On the conquest of Mecca, 
there  were  three  hundred  and  sixty  idols  around  the  Ka‘ba,  fixed  with  lead  to  the 
stone. That day, the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) pointed 
to each of the idols in turn with a stick he was holding curved like a bow, saying, ‘The 
Truth  has  arrived  and  falsehood  has  perished;  indeed,  falsehood  is  ever  bound  to 
perish.’(17:81) “Whichever one he pointed to, it fell down.176 If he pointed to the face 
of the idol, it fell backwards; otherwise it fell on its face. Thus they all toppled over 
and fell to the ground.”177 

E  i  g  h  t h    E  x a  m p  l  e  : This  is  the  famous story  of  the  well-known  monk 
Bahira.  Before  the  beginning  of  his  prophethood,  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon 
whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  was  travelling  towards  Damascus  to  trade  together 
with his uncle Abu Talib and some of the Quraysh. They rested when they came near 
the  church  of  Bahira  the  monk.  Bahira,  who  was  a  hermit  and  did  not  mix  with 
people, suddenly came out. He saw Muhammad the Trustworthy (UWBP) among the 
caravan, and said: “He is the Lord of the World; he will be a prophet.” The Quraysh 
asked: “How do you know?” The  holy monk replied: “I  saw a small cloud over the 
caravan as  you were coming. When  you sat down, the cloud moved toward him and 
cast its shadow over him. I also saw trees and rocks prostrate themselves before him, 
which they only do before prophets.”178 

                                                 
173 Muslim, Sifat al-Qiyama, 19-26; Musnad, ii, 88; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 252; Qadi Iyad, al-
Shifa’, i, 308; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 75; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 630; Ibn Hibban, 
Sahih, ix, 214. 
174 Muslim, Jihad, 87, no: 1781. 
175 Bukhari, Maghazi, 48; Mazalim, 32; Tafsir al-Qur’an, 12; Tirmidhi, Tafsir al-Qur’an, 18 (Bab: Sura 
Bani Isra’il); Ibn Hibban, Sahih, no: 1702. 
176 In Bukhari, Muslim, Tirmidhi, and other books, this much is recorded. Only in the following is the 
Hadith complete. 
177 al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id wa’l-Manba’ al-Fawa’id, vi, 176 (from Ibn Mas’ud). 
178 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 308; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 631; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 3 (Bab: Maja’ 
fi Badi’ al-Nubuwwa); al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi, no: 3699; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 615; 
Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabi, 115. 

 

166

There are at least eighty examples similar to these eight instances. When they are 
put together, they form a chain so strong that no doubt can break it or shake it. Taken 
as a whole, this sort of miracle, that is, the speaking of inanimate beings  in order to 
testify  to  Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  prophethood,  expresses  the  same  certainty  as 
‘consensus  in meaning.’ Each example  is strengthened by the whole. Yes,  a slender 
pole  becomes  strong  when  put  together  with  stout  poles.  If  he  joins  the  army  and 
becomes  a  soldier,  a  weak,  powerless  man  gains  strength  enough  to  challenge  a 
thousand men. 

TWELFTH SIGN 

the greatest importance. 

This consists of three examples that  are related to the Eleventh Sign, but are of 

F i r s t  E x a m p l e : “And when you threw, it was not you who threw; it was 
rather  God  that  threw.”(8:17)  As  established  by  the  researches  of  all  Qur’anic 
commentators  and  the  reports  of  the  scholars  of  Hadith,  this  verse  refers  to  the 
following incident that occurred during the Battle of Badr: 

God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) took up a handful 
of earth and small stones and threw them at the army of the unbelievers, saying: “May 
your  faces  be  deformed!”,  and  just  as  these  words  entered  the  ears  of  all  of  them 
despite being a single phrase, so too the handful of earth entered all their eyes. They 
all became preoccupied with their eyes, and although on the attack, the army suddenly 
turned tail and fled.179  

Also during the Battle of Hunayn180 the authorities on Hadith and foremost Imam 
Muslim report that like at the Battle of Badr, he again threw a handful of earth while 
the unbelievers were staging a fierce attack. Saying: “May your faces be deformed!”, 
the  handful of earth struck the faces of each of them, with God’s leave, the same as 
words  of  the  phrase  entered  all  their  ears.  Busy  with  their  eyes,  they  retreated  and 
fled.  Since  this  extraordinary  event  at  Badr  and  Hunayn  is  not  within  man’s  power 
and ordinary causes, the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition states, “When you threw, it 
was not you who threw; it was rather God that threw.” That is, the event was outside 
human power. It occurred, not through human agency but in an extraordinary manner, 
through divine power. 

S e c o n d  E x a m p l e : The accurate books and foremost Bukhari and Muslim 
narrate that during the Khaybar expedition, a Jewess roasted a goat, filling  it with  a 
very strong poison. She then sent it to God’s Messen 

                                                 
179 al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, vi, 84. 
180 Muslim, Jihad, 76, 81 (Bab: Shahat al-Vujuh); Musnad, v, 286. 

 

167

ger (Upon whom be blessings and peace). The Companions had begun to eat it, when 
the  Prophet  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  suddenly  said:  “Withdraw  you 
hands!  It  tells  me  it  is  poisoned!”  Everyone  pulled  back  his  hand.  But  Bishr  b.  al-
Bara’ had eaten  a single morsel and died from the effects of the  severe poison. The 
Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  sent  for  the  Jewess  called 
Zaynab  and  asked  her  why  she  had  done  it.  The  inauspicious  woman  retorted:  “I 
considered that if you were a prophet, it would not harm you; and if you were a king, 
I  would  save  the  people  from  you.”181  According  to  some  narrations,  the  Prophet 
(UWBP) did not have her put to death, but left her to Bishr’s family to be killed.182 
Now  listen  to  a  few  points  demonstrating  aspects  of  the  miraculousness  in  this 
extraordinary incident: 

The First: According to one narration,  some of the Companions also  heard  the 

goat speaking.183 

The  Second:  According  to  another,  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  said:  “Say, 
Bismillah, then eat; the poison will not affect you.”184 Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani does not 
accept this narration, but others do. 

The  Third:  The  treacherous  Jews  wanted  to  deal  a  sudden  blow  at  God’s 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) and his close Companions, but being 
informed  about  this  from  the  Unseen,  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  warning  proved  true, 
and their plot was uncovered and brought to naught. And when Muhammad (UWBP), 
from  whom  the  Companions  never  heard  an  untrue  statement,  said:  “This  goat  tells 
me that..., ” everyone believed him with conviction as sure as if they themselves had 
heard the goat.185 

T h i r d  E x a m p l e : This consists of three instances of another miracle which 

resembles the Shining Hand and Staff of Moses: 

The  First:  Imam  Ahmad  b.  Hanbal,  explaining  and  authenticating  a  narration 

from Abu Sa‘id al-Khudri, reports: “One dark and stormy night, the  

                                                 
181 From Abu Hurayra: Bukhari, Tibb, 55; Jizya, 7; Maghazi, 41; Abu Da’ud, Diyat, 6, nos: 4509, 4511, 
1512; Darimi, Muqaddima, 11; Musnad, ii, 451. From Anas: Muslim, no: 2992; Bukhari, al-Hiba, 28; 
Abu Da’ud, Diyat, 6, no: 4508. From Jabir b. ‘Abdullah: Darimi, Muqaddima, 11; Abu Da’ud, Diyat, 6, 
no: 4510. For the lines of transmission and narrations about this Hadith, see, Abu Da’ud, Diyat, 6 
182 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 219; iv, 109; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, vi, 256, 264; Ibn al-
Qayyim, Zad al-Ma’ad, iii, 336. 
183 al-Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih, no: 5931; Abu Da’ud, Diyat, 6; Darimi, Muqaddima, 11; al-Jizri, 
Jami’ al-Usul, No: 8888; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 295-6 
184 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 317-9; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 645. 
185 Abu Da’ud, Diyat, 6; Darimi, Muqaddima, 11; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 295-6; 
Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, iv, 262. 

 

168

Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) gave Qatada b. al-Nu‘man a 
staff,  saying:  ‘This  staff  will  light  up ten  yards  all  around  you.  You  will see  a  dark 
shadow when  you arrive at  your house; it is Satan. Throw him out of the house and 
drive him away!’ Qatada took the staff and set off. It cast a light like Moses’ shining 
hand.  He  came  to  his  house,  where  he  saw  the  shadowy  figure,  and  he  drove  it 
away.”186 

The Second: While fighting the idolators during the great Battle of Badr, itself a 
source  of  wonders,  ‘Ukkasha  b.  Muhassin  al-Asadi  had  his  sword  broken.  God’s 
Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) gave him a stout staff in place 
of it, saying: “Fight with this!” Suddenly, with God’s leave, the staff became a long 
white sword, and he fought with it. He carried the sword on his person for the rest of 
his  life  until  he fell  as  a  martyr  during  the  Battle  of  al-Yamama.187  This  incident  is 
certain,  because  throughout  his  life  he  carried  the  sword  with  pride  and  it  became 
famous with the  name of Succour. Thus, two proofs of this  incident are ‘Ukkasha’s 
pride, and the sword’s name, Succour and its widespread fame. 

The  Third:  It  is  narrated  by  authorities  on  Hadith  like  Ibn  ‘Abd  al-Barr,188  a 
celebrated  scholar  known  as  the  Scholar  of  the  Age,  that  at  the  Battle  of  Uhud  the 
sword  of  ‘Abdullah  b.  Jahsh,  a  cousin  of  the  God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace),  was  broken.  The  Messenger  (UWBP)  gave  him  a  staff  and  it 
turned into a sword in his hand. He fought with it, and after the battle that product of a 
miracle remained a sword.189 

In  his  Siyar,  the  well-known  Ibn  Sayyid  al-Nas  reports  that  some  time  later 
‘Abdullah  sold  the sword  to  a  man  called  Bugha’  al-Turki  for  two  hundred  liras.190 
Thus  these  two  swords  were  each  miracles  like  the  Staff  of  Moses.  But  while  no 
aspect  of  miraculousness  remained  in  his  staff  after  Moses’  death,  these  swords 
remained unchanged. 

                                                 
186 Musnad, iii, 65; al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-Rabbani, xxii, 66-7; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ii, 166-
7; al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, xii, 376; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 3323; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 
671; al-‘Asqalani, al-Isaba, no: 7076. 
187 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 333; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 671; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 156; 
Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabi, i, 637; Ibn al-Qayyim, Zad al-Ma’ad (Tahqiq: Arnavudi), iii, 186. 
188 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 333; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 157; Ibn Sayyid al-Nas, ‘Uyun al-Athar, 
ii, 20; al-‘Asqalani, al-Isaba, no: 4583. 
189 ‘Abd al-Barr, al-Istibab, ii, 274 (gloss on al-Isaba); Ibn Hajar, al-Isaba, ii, 287; Ibn Sayyid al-Nas, 
‘Uyun al-Athar, ii, 32; ‘Abd al-Razzaq, al-Musannaf, xi, 279. 
190 Ibn Sayyid al-Nas, ‘Uyun al-Athar, ii, 32; ‘Abd al-Razzaq, al-Musannaf, xi, 279. 

 

169

THIRTEENTH SIGN 

Another of the miracles of Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings and peace) of 
which there are numerous instances, which are reported unanimously, is the sick and 
the  wounded  being  healed  through  his  blessed  breath.  The  reports  of  this  kind  of 
miracle  are,  as  a  whole,  unanimous  in  meaning.  Some  of  the  instances  of  these 
miracles also are considered to be unanimous in meaning. And if the others are single 
reports,  since  they  have  been  rendered  and  confirmed  as  authentic  by  the  exacting 
authorities  of  the  science  of  Hadith,  they  afford  the  certainty  of  science.  We  shall 
mention a few instances of the miracles out of many. 

F i r s t  E x a m p l e : The learned scholar of the Maghrib, Qadi Iyad, in his al-
Shifa’ al-Sharif, narrates through an elevated chain of authorities and numerous lines 
of transmission that Sa‘d b. Abi Waqqas, the Noble Messenger’s (UWBP) servant and 
commander, and commander-in-chief of the army of Islam in the time of ‘Umar, the 
conqueror  of  Iran,  and  one  of  the  ten  promised  Paradise,  said:  “I  was  at  the  Noble 
Messenger’s  (UWBP)  side  during  the  Battle  of  Uhud.  He  shot  arrows  at  the 
unbelievers until his bow broke. Then he gave arrows to me, telling me to shoot them. 
The arrows he gave me were without flights, that is, without the feathers which help 
them fly. He was ordering me to shoot them, which I did, and they flew like flighted 
arrows, hitting the unbelievers’ bodies and piercing them.”191 At that point, Qatada b. 
Nu‘man was hit in the eye by  an arrow; it was struck out of his  head, so that it was 
sitting on the side of his face. God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) 
took the eye in his blessed, healing hand and placed it in its socket; it was healed as 
though nothing had happened to it and became the better of his two eyes. This event 
became very widely  known. A  grandson of Qatada, even, once described himself to 
‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz as, “I am the grandson of one who, when God’s Most Noble 
Messenger (UWBP) placed his eye back  in  its  socket  after  it had been struck out, it 
was suddenly  healed and became his best eye.”192 He said this  in  verse,  introducing 
himself to ‘Umar in that way. 

It is also related through an authentic narration that during the battle known as the 

Yawm Dhi-Qarad, Abu Qatada was hit in the face by an  

                                                 
191 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 322; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 651; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, 
vi, 113; Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 42, no: 2412; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, ix, 65. 
192 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 322; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, vi, 113; al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, 
xii, 377; Ibn al-Qayyim, Zad al-Ma’ad (Tahqiq: Arnavudi), iii, 186-7; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 
295. 

 

170

arrow. God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) touched his face with 
his blessed hand. Abu Qatada said: “I felt no pain at all, nor did the wound fester.”193  
S e c o n d  E x a m p l e : The authentic books of Hadith, and foremost Bukhari 
and Muslim, report that the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) 
had appointed ‘Ali al-Haydari as standard-bearer during the Battle of Khaybar, but his 
eyes were aching severly due to illness. The moment the Noble Messenger (UWBP) 
applied his healing spittle to his eyes, they were cured, with no trace of the discomfort 
remaining.194  The  following  morning,  ‘Ali  conquered  the  citadel  of  Khaybar  by 
removing  its  extremely  heavy  gate  and  using  it  in  his  hand  as  a  shield.  During  the 
same  battle,  Salama  b.  al-Akwa‘’s  leg  was  struck  and  split  open  by  a  sword;  God’s 
Messenger (UWBP) breathed onto it, and the leg was at once healed.195  

T h i r d  E x a m p l e : Authorities on the Prophet’s (UWBP) life, and foremost 
Nasa’i, report from ‘Uthman b. Hunayf, who said: “A blind man came to God’s Noble 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) and said: ‘Pray so that my eyes may 
be healed and I may see!’ The Messenger (UWBP) said: ‘Go and take the ablutions, 
then pray two rak‘ats and say: O God! I beseech you and I turn to you, for the sake of 
the  Prophet  Muhammad,  the  Prophet  of  Mercy.  O  Muhammad!  I  turn  to  your 
Sustainer,  for  your sake and through  you, asking  that  He uncover my  sight. O God, 
make him my intercessor!’ He went and did this, and when he returned, we saw that 
his eyes had opened and he could see very well.”196  

F  o  u  r  t  h    E  x  a  m p  l e  :  A  great  authority,  Ibn  Wahab,  reports:  “The  hero 
Mu‘awwidh b. ‘Afra’, one of the fourteen martyrs of the Battle of Badr, had his hand 
cut off by Abu Jahl the Accursed while fighting with him. He took the hand with his 
other hand and went to the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace). 
the  Messenger  (UWBP)  stuck  the  hand  in  its place  and  spread  his  spittle  over  it.  It 
was at once  healed. Mu‘awwidh went again to fight and continued to do so until  he 
was martyred.”197  

                                                 
193 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 322; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 113; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 653. 
194 Bukhari, Jihad, 102, 144; Maghazi, 38; Fada’il al-Sahaba, 32, 34; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 38. 
195 Bukhari, Maghazi, 38 (from Yazid b. ‘Ubayd); Abu Da’ud, Tibb, 19; al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-Rabbani 
Sharh al-Musnad, xxii, 259. 
196 Tirmidhi, Da’wat, 119, no: 3578; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, i, 526; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, vi, 
166; Ibn Maja, Iqama, 189; Musnad, iv, 138. 
197 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 324; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 656; Ibn Sayyid al-Nas, ‘Uyun al-Athar, 
i, 261. 

 

171

 

172

Imam Jalil b. Wahab also reports: “During that same battle, Hubayb b. Yasaf was 
struck on the shoulder by a sword so that he received a grievous wound with part of it 
almost  severed.  The  Noble  Messenger  (UWBP)  joined  the  arm  and  shoulder  back 
together again and breathed on it, and it was healed.198  

Thus, for sure these two incidents are separate, single reports, but if an authority 
like Ibn Wahab considered them to be sound, and if they occurred during a battle like 
that of Badr, which was a spring of miracles, and if there were many other examples 
that  resembled  these  two  incidents,  for  sure  it  may  be  said  that  they  definitely 
occurred.  Indeed,  there  are  perhaps  a  thousand  examples  established  in  authentic 
traditions for which the blessed hand of God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings 
and peace) was healing. 

 A    Q  u  e  s  t  i o  n  :  You describe  many  things  as  being reported unanimously 
through  many  channels,  but  we  are  hearing  most  of  them  for  the  first  time.  Surely 
something the  various reports of which are  numerous and unanimous cannot remain 
thus secret? 

T h e  A n s w e r : There are numerous things concerning the reports of which 
there is a consensus and which are self-evident to the learned scholars of the Shari‘a, 
but are unknown to those who are not one of them. For the scholars of Hadith there 
are many such things, which for poets have not even the status of isolated reports, and 
so  on.  The  specialists  of  all  the  sciences  explain  the  theories  and  axioms  of  their 
science, and the ordinary people rely on them and either submit to them, or become 
one of them and see for themselves. Now, the events the reports of which we describe 
as forming ‘true consensus,‘ ‘consensus in meaning,’ or which express certainty like 
consensus,  have  been  shown  to  be  thus  by  both  the  scholars  of  Hadith,  and  the 
scholars of the Shari‘a, and the scholars of the principles of religion, and by most of 
the other levels of the ‘ulama. If ordinary people in their heedlessness or the ignorant 
who close their eyes to the truth do not know this, the fault is theirs. 

F i f t h  E x a m p l e : Having explained and authenticated it, Imam Baghawi 
relates: “At the Battle of Khandaq, ‘Ali b. al-Hakam’s leg was broken by the blow of 
an unbeliever. The Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) rubbed it. 
At  the  moment  he  did  so,  it  was  healed  so  that  ‘Ali  b.  al-Hakam  did  not  even 
dismount from his horse.”199 

                                                 
198 , Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, vi, 178; Ibn Hajar, al-Isaba, i, 418; Ibn al-Athir, Usd al-Ghaba, ii, 118. 
199 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 324; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 656; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 118;  
al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, iv, 134. 

 

173

S i x t h  E x a m p l e : The scholars of Hadith, and foremost Imam Bayhaqi, 
relate: “‘Ali was very ill. In his distress, he was moaning and praying for himself. The 
Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) came and said: ‘O God! Grant 
him  healing,’  and  touched  ‘Ali  with  his  foot.  He  told  him  to  stand,  and  ‘Ali  was  at 
once cured. He stated: ‘I never again suffered from that illness.’”200 

S e v e n t h  E x a m p l e : This is the well-known story of Shurahbil al-Ju‘fi. He 
had a morbid growth on the palm of his hand so that he could hold neither his sword 
nor  the  reins  of  his  horse.  God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace) 
rubbed  the  growth  with  his  blessed  hand  and  massaged  it;  not  a  trace  of  it 
remained.201 

E i g h t h  E x a m p l e : Six children, each the object of a different miracle of 

Muhammad (UWBP): 

The First: Ibn Abi Shayba,  a meticulous researcher  and well-known  scholar of 
Hadith,  relates  that  a  woman  brought  her  child  to  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP).  The 
child  had  an  affliction;  he  could  not  speak  and  was  an  idiot.  God’s  Messenger 
(UWBP) rinsed his mouth with water and washed his  hands, then  gave the water to 
the  woman,  telling  her to  give  it  to  the  child  to drink.  After  the  child  had  drunk  it, 
nothing  remained  of  his  illness  and  affliction,  and  he  became  so  intelligent,  he 
surpassed even the brightest of the rest.202 

The  Second:  According  to  an  authentic  narration,  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said:  “An  insane 
child was brought to the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace). He 
placed his blessed hand on the child’s chest and the child suddenly vomited a small 
black object like a cucumber. The child was healed and went home.”203 

The  Third:  Imam  Bayhaqi  and  Nasa’i  relate  through  an  authentic  chain  of 
transmission that a child called Muhammad b. al-Hatib had been scalded by a pan of 
boiling water and his whole arm burnt. God’s Noble Messenger (UWBP) touched the 
arm, spreading his spittle over it; the same instant it was healed.204 

                                                 
200 Tirmidhi, Da’wat, 121; Musnad, i, 83, 107, 128; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 323; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-
Shifa’, i, 656; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, ix, 47; al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi, 3635. 
201 al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 298; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 324; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-
Shifa’, i, 657. 
202 Ibn Maja, Tibb, 40, no: 3532; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 324; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 654, 657. 
203 Darimi, Muqaddima, 4; Musnad, i, 254; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 324; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 
657; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 2; Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih, iii, 188. 
204 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 324; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 657; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 121; 
al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 415; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, i, 295; al-Hakim, al-
Mustadrak, iv, 62-3. 

 

174

The  Fourth:  A  child  who  was  not  young  but  was  mute  came  to  the  Noble 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace). He asked the child: “Who am I?” 
The child, who had been mute from birth, replied: “You are the Messenger  of God,” 
and started to speak.205 

The  Fifth:  Jalal  al-Din  Suyuti,  who was  honoured  with  conversing  with  God’s 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) on many occasions while awake and 
was the leading scholar of his age, explaining and authenticating a narration, reports: 
Soon after being born, a famous person called Mubarak al-Yamama was taken to the 
Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace). On his turning to the baby, it 
started to speak, saying: “I testify that you are the Messenger of God.” The Messenger 
(UWBP)  exclaimed:  “May  God  bless  you!”  The  child  never  spoke  again  in  his 
infancy,  and  later  became  famous  as  Mubarak  al-Yamama  (the  blessed  one, 
Yamama), since he had been the object of this miracle of the Prophet (UWBP) and his 
prayer.206 

The Sixth: One time, an ill-mannered youth interrupted the prayer of the Noble 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace), by passing in front of him while he 
was  performing  it.  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  said:  “O  God,  cut  short  his  paces!” 
After this the child was unable to walk as a punishment for his bad behaviour.207 

The Seventh: A shameless woman, who was like a child, asked for a piece of the 
food God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) was eating. He gave her 
some, but she said:  “No,  I  want  a  piece  from  your  mouth.”  So  he  gave  her  a  piece, 
and,  after  eating  the  morsel,  she  became  the  most  modest  and  bashful  woman  in 
Medina.208 

There  are  not  eighty  but  perhaps  eight  hundred  further  examples  similar  to  the 
eight mentioned above, most of which  are related in the  Hadith books and books of 
the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  biography.  For  sure,  since  the  blessed  hand  of  God’s 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) was like a pharmacy of Luqman the 
Wise, and his spittle was like a spring of Khidr’s water of life, and his breath soothing 
and  healing  like that of Jesus (Upon whom be peace), certainly many people would 
have recourse  

                                                 
205 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 319; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 105; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, 
iv, 158-9. 
206 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 319; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 105; Suyuti, Kanz al-‘Ummal, iv, 379; 
Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, iv, 159. 
207 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 328; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 137; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 663. 
208 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 325; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 657; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, 
viii, 312. 

 

175

to him; and the sick, children, and the insane did flock to him in great numbers, and 
they  were all  healed.  Abu  ‘Abd  al-Rahman  al-Yamani, known  as  Tavus, even,  who 
made the Hajj forty times and for forty years performed the morning prayer with the 
ablution of the preceeding night prayers, and who met with many of the Companions 
and  was  one  of  the  greatest  scholars  of  the  generation  following  them,  stated  and 
made the certain report that however many lunatics came to God’s Messenger (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace), he placed his  hand on their chests and they  were all 
healed; not one was not cured.209 

Thus, since a great scholar such as that who had direct connections with the era 
of the Prophet (UWBP), made such definite and general statements, for sure, none of 
the sick who came to God’s Prophet (UWBP) were not healed; they were all healed. 
Since this was the case, certainly thousands would have had recourse to him. 

FOURTEENTH SIGN 

Another  numerous  sort  of  the  various  kinds  of  miracle  of  God’s  Most  Noble 
Messenger (Upon  whom  be blessings  and  peace)  were  the  wonders  manifested  as  a 
result of his prayers. This kind is definite and there is a ‘true consensus’ concerning 
their  many  reports.  The  instances  and  examples  of  it  are  so  numerous  as  to  be 
incalculable,  and  many  of  these  have  reached  the  degree  of  ‘consensus,’  or  have 
become famous as such. Others  have been related by  such authorities that they bear 
the  same  certainty  as  ‘well-known  consensus.’  As  examples,  we  shall  quote  only 
some of the numerous instances of this kind of miracle that are very well-known and 
nearest in degree to ‘consensus,’ giving some particulars of each instance. 

F  i  r  s  t    E  x  a m p l  e  :  The  fact  that  prayers  of  the  Noble  Messenger (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace) for rain were always accepted has been transmitted by 
authorities  of  Hadith,  primarily  Bukhari and  Muslim.  There  were  times when  in  the 
pulpit he raised his hands to pray for rain, and before he had lowered them even, rain 
began  to  fall.210  As  mentioned  above,  once  or  twice  when  the  army  had  run  out  of 
water, the clouds came and poured forth rain.211 Before his prophetic mission, even, 
during his childhood, the Prophet’s (UWBP) grandfather ‘Abd al-Muttalib would go 
to pray for rain with him, and the rain came out of respect for Muhammad (UWBP). 
The fact became celebrated through a poem of ‘Abd al- 

                                                 
209 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 335; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 676. 
210 Bukhari, Istisqa, 6-8, 14; Muslim, Istisqa, 8-10. 
211 al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, vi, 194-5; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, i, 159; Ibn Hibban, iv, 223. 

 

176

Muttalib.212  And  after  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  death,  ‘Umar  prayed  citing  ‘Abbas, 
saying:  “O  our  Sustainer!  This  is  the  uncle  of  your  Beloved.  Send  us  rain  for  his 
sake!” And it rained.213  

Bukhari and Muslim also relate that God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings 
and peace) was asked to pray for rain. He did so and so much rain fell that they had to 
ask him to pray for it to stop. He did so, and it stopped at once.214  

S e c o n d  E x a m p l e : It is almost as well-known as those incidents about 
which  there  are  many  unanimous  reports  that  when  the  number of  Companions  and 
believers  had  still  not  reached  forty,  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace)  prayed  secretly  while  performing  his  worship:  “O  God! 
Strengthen Islam by means of either ‘Umar b. al-Khattab or ‘Umar b. Hisham.” A few 
days later, ‘Umar b. al-Khattab came to believe and proclaimed and upheld Islam, so 
that he acquired the title of Faruq (Discerner between truth and falsehood).215 

T  h  i  r  d    E  x  a  m  p  l  e  :  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  prayed  for  various 
distinguished Companions for different purposes. His prayers were all accepted in so 
brilliant a fashion that the wonders of these prayers reached the degree of a miracle. 
For  instance,  foremost  Bukhari  and  Muslim  relate  that  he  prayed  for  Ibn  ‘Abbas  as 
follows:  “O  God!  Give  him  knowledge  of  religion  and  teach  him  interpretation.”216 
His supplication was accepted in such a way that Ibn ‘Abbas gained the glorious title 
of Interpreter of the Qur’an and reached the elevated degree of “erudite scholar of the 
Muslim community.”217 When still very young even, ‘Umar used to include him in  

                                                 
212 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, i, 90; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 15-19. 
213 Bukhari, Istisqa, 3; Fada’il Ashab al-Nabi, 11. 
214 Bukhari, Istisqa, 19; Ibn Maja, Iqama, 154;  Muslim, Salat al-Istisqa, 8, no: 897; Ibn Kathir, al-
Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, vi, 91-2; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 327. 
215 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 18, no: 1683; al-Albani, Mishkat al-Masabih, no: 6036; al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat 
al-Ahwazi, no: 3766; Ibn Asir al-Jizri, Jami’ al-Usul, no: 7428; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, ix, 17; al-Hakim, 
al-Mustadrak, ii, 465; iii, 83, 502; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 327; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 215. 
216 Bukhari, Vudu’, 10; ‘Ilm, 17; Fada’il al-Ashab, 24; Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 138; Ibn Hibban, 
Sahih, ix, 98; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 327; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 661; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-
Shifa’, iii, 130; Ibn al-Asir, Jami’ al-Usul, ix, 63; Musnad, i, 264, 314, 328, 330; al-Hakim, al-
Mustadrak, iv, 534 
217 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 535; Ibn Hajar, al-Isaba, ii, 330-4; Ibn Athir, Usd al-Ghaba, iii, 291; 
Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 327. 

 

177

the gatherings of the religious scholars and leading  Companions.218 

Also,  foremost  Bukhari  and  the  writers  of  books  of  authentic  Hadith  relate  that 
the  mother  of  Anas  entreatied  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (UWBP):  “Pray  that  your 
servant Anas will be blessed with abundant wealth and offspring.” He prayed, saying: 
“O  God!  Grant  increase  to  his  wealth  and  offspring  and  bless  what  you  bestow  on 
him.”  Towards  the  end  of  his  life,  Anas  said  swearing  by  God:  “I  have  buried  a 
hundred of my progeny with my own hand. No one has been as fortunate as myself in 
regard to wealth and possessions. You can see that my wealth  is truly abundant. All 
these are the result of Prophet’s (UWBP) prayer for the blessing of plenty.”219 

Also,  foremost  Imam  Bayhaqi,  and  the  scholars  of  Hadith  relate  that  God’s 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) prayed that one of the ten promised 
Paradise, ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Awf, be blessed with abundance of wealth. Through the 
blessing  of  that  prayer,  he  acquired  such  wealth  that  on  one  occasion  he  donated 
seven hundred camels together with their loads to God’s cause220 See the blessings of 
plenty resulting from the Prophet’s (UWBP) prayer, and say:  “How great are God’s 
blessings!” 

Also,  narrators  of  Hadiths,  and  foremost  Bukhari,  relate:  “God’s  Messenger 
(Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  prayed  that  ‘Urwa  b.  Abi  al-Ja‘da  might  do 
profitably at trade. ‘Urwa said: ‘Sometimes I would go to the marketplace in Kufa and 
come home in the evening having made a forty thousandfold profit.’” Imam Bukhari 
says: “If he took earth in his hand, he still would make a profit from it!”221 

Also, he prayed that ‘Abdullah b. Ja‘far would acquire an abundance of wealth,222 
and  he  became  so  rich  he  was  famous  for  it.  He  also  became  as  famous  for  his 
generosity as he was for the wealth he obtained through the Prophet’s (UWBP) prayer 
for the blessing of plenty.223  

There  are  numerous  instances  of  this  sort  of  miracle,  but  we  consider  the  four 

described above to be sufficient as examples. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 
218 Musnad, i, 338; Ahmad b. Hanbal, Fada’il al-Sahaba, no: 1871; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 535; 
‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 661. 
219 Bukhari, Da’wat, 19, 26, 47; Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 141, 142, nos: 2480-1; Musnad, iii, 190; vi, 
430; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, ix, 155; al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi, x, 330. 
220 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 326; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 659; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 125. 
221 Bukhari, Manaqib, 28; Ibn Maja, Sadaqat, 7; Musnad, iv, 375; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 327; al-Sa’ati, 
al-Fath al-Rabbani, xxii, 326. 
222 al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 286; Ibn Hajar, Matalib al-‘Aliya, iv, 105; Bayhaqi, Dala’il 
al-Nubuwwa, vi, 221. 
223 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 327; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 661; al-Haythami, Majma^ al-Zawa’id, 
v, 286; Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, al-Matalib al-‘Aliya, no: 4077-8. 

178

 

179

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

178

Also,  foremost  Imam  Tirmidhi  relates: “The Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings and peace) prayed for Sa‘d b. Abi Waqqas: ‘O God, answer his prayer!’224 
After  that  everyone  feared  his  malediction,  and  the  answering  of  his  prayers  also 
became famous.225 

On  another  occasion,  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  prayed  for  the  famous  Abu 
Qatada that he might remain  young:  “May God prosper  your face! O God, bless his 
hair and his skin!” When he died at the age of seventy, he was like a youth of fifteen. 
This is related through a sound chain of narrators.226 

There is also the famous story of the poet Nabigha: he recited one of his poems 
before God’s Messenger (UWBP), which ran: “Our glory and praise have reached to 
the skies; we want to ascend even higher.” God’s Messenger (UWBP) asked jokingly: 
“Where, beyond the skies?” Nabigha replied: “To Paradise.” He then recited another 
of  his  meaningful  poems,  and  the  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace) 
prayed: “May God not spoil your mouth!” It was through the blessing of this prayer of 
the  Prophet  (UWBP)  that  he  did  not  have  a  single  tooth  missing  when  he  was  one 
hundred and twenty  years old. Whenever he lost a tooth, another would appear in its 
place.227 

Also, it is related through an authentic narration that he prayed for Imam ‘Ali: “O 
God, protect him from heat and cold!” Through the blessing of this prayer, Imam ‘Ali 
used to wear summer clothes in winter, and winter clothes in summer. He used to say: 
“I never suffer from heat or cold, thanks to that prayer.”228 

Also, he prayed for Fatima: “O God, do not let her go hungry!” And Fatima used 

to say: “I never suffered from hunger after that prayer.”229 

Also,  Tufayl  b.  ‘Amr  asked  God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and 

peace) for a miracle to show to his tribe. The Messenger (UWBP)  

                                                 
224Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 27, no: 3751; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, no: 12215; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 499; 
Abu Nu’aym, Hilyat al-Awliya, i, 93; Abu Nu’ayim, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, iii, 206; al-Albani, Mishkat 
al-Masabih, iii, 251, no: 6116; al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi, x, 253-4 no: 3835; Ahmad b. Hanbal, 
Fada’il al-Sahaba, ii, 750, no: 1038; Ibn al-Asir, Jami’ al-Usul, x, 16, no: 6535. 
225 Ibn al-Athir, Usd al-Ghaba, ii, 367; Ibn Hajar, al-Isaba, ii, 33. 
226 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 327; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 660; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 128. 
227 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 661; Ibn Hajar, al-Isaba fi Tamyiz al-Sahaba, no: 8639; al-
‘Asqalani, al-Matalib al-‘Aliya, no: 4060; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, vi, 168. 
228 al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 122; Ahmad b. Hanbal, Fada’il al-Sahaba, no: 950; Ibn Maja, 
Muqaddima 11, No: 117; Musnad, i, 99, 133; Musnad (Tahqiq: Ahmad Shakir), ii, 120, no: 1114; al-
Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 133. 
229 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 328; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 134; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, 
ix, 203. 

 

179

prayed: “O God, illuminate him!”, and a light appeared between his eyes. Later it was 
transferred to the end of his staff, and he became famous as Dhi’l-Nur, the Possessor 
of Light.230 These incidents are all from well-known Hadiths that are certain. 

Also,  Abu  Hurayra  once  complained  to  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings and peace) that he sometimes suffered from forgetfulness. God’s Messenger 
(UWBP) told him to spread out a piece of cloth. He then made some movements with 
his  blessed  hand  as  though  taking  some  invisible  objects  and  putting  them  on  the 
cloth. He repeated this two or three times, then told him to gather up the cloth. Abu 
Hurayra later swore that through the mystery of this prayer of the Prophet (UWBP), 
he never again forgot anything.231 This event is also among well-known Hadiths. 

F  o  u  r  t  h    E  x  a  m  p  l  e  :  We  shall  describe  here  a  few  events  regarding 

maledictions of God’s Messenger (UWBP). 

The  First:  The  Persian  Shah  Parviz  tore  up  the  letter  sent  to  him  by  God’s 
Messenger  (UWBP).  When  the  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace) 
received news of this, he prayed: “O God, rend him as he rent my letter!”232 It was as 
a result of this malediction that Chosroes Parviz’s son Shirviya cut him to pieces with 
a dagger.233 And Sa‘d b. al-Waqqas broke his kingdom apart, so that in no part of the 
Sasanid empire did his sovereignty remain. However, the Emperor of Byzantium and 
other kings did not perish since they respected the Prophet’s (UWBP) letters. 

The  Second:  An  event  almost  as  well-known  as  those  reported  unanimously, 
which  some  verses  of  the  Qur’an  allude  to,  is  this:  in  the  early  days  of  Islam,  the 
Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) was performing the prayers in 
the Masjid al-Haram, when the chiefs of the Quraysh gathered and maltreated him. At 
the time, the Messenger (UWBP) called down curses on them. Ibn Mas‘ud stated: “I 
swear that at the Battle of Badr I saw the corpses of all those who had ill-treated him 
and received his curse.”234 

                                                 
230 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 328; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 134; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 662. 
231 Bukhari, ‘Ilm, 42; Manaqib, 28; Buyu’, 1; Harth, 21; Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 159, no: 2492; 
Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 46, 47; Musnad, ii, 240, 274, 428; al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi, x, 334 no: 
3923; Ibn al-Asir, Jami’ al-Usul (Tahqiq: Arnavud), ix, 95; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, vi, 162; 
al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-Rabbani, xxii, 405, 409-10; Abu Nu’aym, Hilyat al-Awliya, i, 381; al-‘Asqalani, 
al-Isaba, no: 1190. 
232 Bukhari, ‘Ilm, 7; Jihad, 101; Maghazi, 82; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 328; al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-
Rabbani, xxii, 159. 
233 Ibn Hisham, al-Sirat al-Nabawiyya, i, 71; Tabari, Tarikh al-Umma wa’l-Muluk, ii, 135; Ibn Kathir, 
al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, x, 369. 
234 Bukhari, Salat, 109; Manaqib al-Ansar, 45; Muslim, Jihad, 107 no: 1794; Musnad, i, 417. 

 

180

The  Third:  On  their  denying  him,  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace)  prayed  that  a  large  Arab  tribe  called  the  Mudariyya  would  be 
afflicted with drought and famine. All rain ceased and drought and famine occurred. 
Then  the  Quraysh,  a  branch  of  the  Mudariyya,  pleaded  with  the  Noble  Messenger 
(UWBP), and he prayed. Whereupon the rains came and put an end to the drought.235 
The incident was well-known enough to be reported unanimously. 

F  i  f  t  h   E  x a  m p  l  e  : The  fact that  the  Messenger’s  (UWBP)  maledictions 
against particular persons were accepted and realized in a dreadful way is illustrated 
by numerous instances. We shall recount three of these by way of example. 

The First: He uttered the following curse against ‘Utba b. Abi Lahab: “O God, 
beset a dog on him from among your dogs!” Some time later ‘Utba went on a journey 
during  which  a  lion  sought  him  out  from  among  the  caravan,  and  tore  him  to 
pieces.236 This incident was famous and is narrated as authentic by the authorities on 
Hadith. 

The Second: This is Muhallim b. Jaththama: he unjustly killed ‘Amir b. Adbat, 
whom God’s Messenger (UWBP) had sent him as the commander of a force to fight 
in God’s way. When the news of this reached the Messenger (UWBP), he was angry 
and  cursed  Muhallim,  saying:  “O  God,  do  not  grant  forgiveness  to  Muhallim!” 
Muhallim  died  a  week  later. They  put  him  in  his  grave,  but the  grave  cast  him out. 
They  buried  him  in  several  different  places,  but  each  time  the  grave  rejected  him. 
Finally  they  built  a  strong  wall  between  two  rocks,  and  in  this  way  the  corpse  was 
housed.237 

The Third: Once God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) 
saw a man eating with  his  left hand. He ordered him to eat with his right hand. The 
man  replied:  “I  can’t.” The  Messenger  (UWBP)  said  as  a  malediction:  “Henceforth 
you will be unable to raise it.” And after that he was unable to use it.238 

S  i  x  t  h    E  x  a  m  p  l  e  :  Here,  out  of  the  numerous  wonders  resulting  from 
prayers of the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace), and from his 
touch, we shall mention several incidents which are certain.  

                                                 
235 Bukhari, Tafsir, 30; 28:3; 44:3-4;  Da’wat, 58; Istisqa, 13; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 328; ‘Ali al-Qari, 
Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 663; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 324. 
236 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 329; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 664. 
237 Ibn Maja, Fitan, 1, no: 3930; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 329; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 665; al-
Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 142; Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabi, iv, 247; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-
Nihaya, iv, 224-6. 
238 Muslim, Ashriba, 107, no: 2021; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, viii, 152; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 328-9; ‘Ali al-
Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 666. 

 

181

The First: God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) gave Khalid 
b. al-Walid, known as God’s Sword, several of his hairs and prayed for his victory in 
battle. Khalid put them in his cap. As the result of the hairs and the blessings of the 
prayer, there was never a battle in which he then fought but he was victorious.239 

The Second: Salman al-Farsi had formerly been a slave of the Jews. His masters 
had  asked  for  a  very  high  ransom,  saying:  “To  gain  your  freedom,  you  must  plant 
three  hundred date-palms, and after they bear fruit, give us  forty okkas240 of gold in 
addition  to  the  fruit.”  He  went  to  the  Noble  Messenger  (UWBP)  and  explained  his 
situation.  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  then  planted  the  three  hundred  palms  in  the 
region of Medina; only one of them was planted by someone else. That year, all three 
hundred  trees  bore  fruit,  with  the  exception of  the  one  planted  by  the  other  person. 
The  Messenger  (UWBP)  uprooted  it  and  planted  another,  and  it  too  bore  fruit.  He 
then rubbed some of his spittle on a piece of gold the size of a hen’s egg, and offered 
a prayer. He gave it to Salman, telling him to go and give it to the Jews. Salman al-
Farsi went and gave them forty okkas of gold out of that piece, while it remained in its 
original  state.241  This  miraculous  incident,  which  was  narrated  by  the  most 
trustworthy  and  respected  authorities,  was  the  most  significant  event  in  Salman’s 
entire life. 

The  Third:  A  woman  Companion  called  Umm  Malik  used  to  give  the  Noble 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) butter from a leathern bag called an 
‘ukka, as a gift. On one occasion God’s Messenger (UWBP) uttered a prayer over it 
while returning it to her, and told her not to empty it and squeeze it. Umm Malik took 
the ‘ukka, and thereafter as a result of the blessing of the Prophet’s (UWBP) prayer, 
butter was found in  it whenever  her children asked for it. This  continued for a long 
time, until they squeezed it, and the blessing disappeared.242 

S e v e n t h  E x a m p l e : There were also many examples of water becoming 
sweet and emitting a pleasant smell as a result of the Prophet’s (UWBP) prayer and 
his touching it; we shall mention several by way of example:  

The First: Scholars of Hadith, and foremost Imam Bayhaqi, report that the well 

known as Bi’r al-Quba would sometimes dry up. On God’s Mes 

                                                 
239 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 331; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 349; al-‘Asqalani, al-Matalib al-
‘Aliya, iv, 90, no: 4044; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 289. 
240 1 okka was the equivalent of 1,282 gr. or 2.8 lbs. (Tr.) 
241 Musnad, v, 441-2; Ibn Sa’d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, iv, 53-7; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 
332-6; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, 332; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 16. 
242 Muslim, Fada’il, 8, no: 2280; Musnad, iii, 340, 347; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 332. 

 

182

senger  (UWBP)  pouring  the  water  with  which  he  had  taken  ablutions  into  the  well 
and offering a prayer, its water became abundant and it never again dried up.243 

The  Second:  Scholars  of  Hadith,  including  Abu  Nu‘aym  in  his  Dala’il  al-
Nubuwwa (Evidences  of  Prophethood),  report  that  when  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP) 
spat  into  the  well  in  Anas’  house  and  prayed,  it  became  the  sweetest  water  in 
Medina.244 

The  Third:  Ibn  Maja  reports  that  a  bucketful  of  water  from  the  spring  of 
Zamzam was brought to the Messenger (UWBP). He took a little of it into his mouth 
then emptied it into the bucket. The bucket then emitted a sweet scent like musk.245 

The Fourth: Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal reports that a bucketful of water was drawn 
from a well. After God’s Messenger (UWBP) had put some of his spittle in the bucket 
and poured it into the well, it began to emit a sweet scent like musk.246 

The  Fifth:  Hammad  b.  Salama,  who  was  a  man  of  God  and  was  trusted  and 
accepted  by  Imam  Muslim  and  the  scholars  of  the  Maghrib,  reports  that  the  Noble 
Messenger  (UWBP)  filled  a  leather  bag  with  water,  and  breathed  into  it  while 
praying.  He  then  tied  it  up  and  gave  it  to  some  of  the  Companions,  saying:  “Don’t 
open it  except when  you perform the ablutions!”  When they opened the bag to take 
ablutions, they saw pure milk with cream at its opening. 247 

Thus,  these  five  instances  have  been  narrated  by  well-known  and  important 
authorities.  Together  with  those  that  are  not  mentioned  here,  they  prove  the 
occurrence  of  this  kind  of  miracle  as  definitely  as  those  about  the  various  reports 
concerning which there is consensus in meaning. 

E i g h t h  E x a m p l e : There were numerous instances of barren and dry goats 
producing milk, and abundantly at that, through the touch and prayers of God’s Noble 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace). We shall mention only two or three 
which are well-known and certain, as examples: 

The First: All the reliable books of the Prophet’s (UWBP) biography relate that 

when God’s Messenger (UWBP) and Abu Bakr the Veracious  

                                                 
243 Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, vi, 136; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 331; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 
149. 
244 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 331; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 668. 
245 Ibn Maja, Tahara, 136, no: 659; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 332; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 669. 
246 al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-Rabbani, xxii, 667. 
247 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 334; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 160. 

 

183

were migrating to Medina, they came to the house of Umm Ma‘bad, called Atika Bint 
Khalid  al-Khuza‘i.  There  was  an  extremely  thin,  barren,  and  dry  goat  there.  God’s 
Messenger (UWBP) asked Umm Ma‘bad: “Has this no milk?” She replied: “It has no 
blood in its body, how should it produce milk?” The Messenger (UWBP) stroked its 
loins and teets, and prayed. Then he said: “Bring a vessel, and milk it.” They milked 
it,  and  after  the Messenger  (UWBP)  and  Abu  Bakr  had drunk,  all  the  people  of  the 
house drank to repletion. The goat grew strong, and remained thus blessed.248 

The  Second:  This  is  the  famous  story  of  Shat  b.  Mas‘ud:  before  becoming  a 
Muslim,  Ibn  Mas‘ud  used  to  act  as  a  shepherd  for  a  number  of  people.  God’s 
Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  went  together  with  Abu  Bakr  the 
Veracious  to  the  place  where  Ibn  Mas‘ud  and  his  goats  were.  God’s  Messenger 
(UWBP)  asked  Ibn  Mas‘ud  for  some  milk.  On  replying  that  they  were  not  his  but 
someone else’s, the Messenger (UWBP) told him to bring him a barren, dry goat. So 
he  brought  a  nanny-goat  that  had  not  been  mated  for  two  years.  God’s  Messenger 
(UWBP) stroked its teets with his hand and prayed. Then they milked it, and obtained 
sweet  milk  which  they  drank.  Ibn  Mas‘ud  came  to  believe  after  witnessing  this 
miracle.249 

The  Third:  This  is  the well-known  story  of Halima  Sa‘diya,  the  foster  mother, 
that  is,  wet-nurse,  of  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace). 
There  was  drought  where  the  tribe  was  found,  and  all  the  animals  were  thin  and 
without milk. They could not find sufficient to eat. But when the Messenger (UWBP) 
was sent to his foster mother there, through the blessing he brought, Halima Sa‘diya’s 
goats  would  return  in  the  evening  with  both  their  stomachs  and  their  teets  full, 
contrary to everyone else’s. 

There are further instances in the books of biography similar to these, but these 

examples are sufficient for our purpose.250 

N i n t h  E x a m p l e : We shall recount here a few out of many instances of 
wonders  which  were  manifested  after  God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings 
and peace) had touched the faces and heads of certain people, and prayed. 

                                                 
248 Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih (Tahqiq: al-Albani), no: 5943: al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, vi, 
58; viii, 313; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 109; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, iii, 190-1; Ibn al-
Qayyim, Zad al-Ma’ad, iii, 55, 57; Ibn Sa’d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, i, 230-1. 
249 Musnad (Tahqiq: Ahmad Shakir), v, 210 no: 3598; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, viii, 149; Ibn Kathir, al-
Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, vi, 102. 
250 al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-Rabbani, xx, 192-3; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 220-1; Abu 
Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 111-3; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, ii, 273; Qadi Iyad, al-
Shifa’, i, 366; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 750; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 313. 

 

184

The First: He passed his hand over the head of ‘Umar b. Sa‘d, and prayed. When 
the man died at the age of eighty, through the blessing of that prayer, there was not a 
single grey hair on his head.251 

The Second: He placed his hand on Qays b. Zayd’s head, and prayed. Through 
the blessing of the prayer and effect of his touch, when Qays reached a hundred years 
of  age,  his  head  was  white  except  for  where  God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings and peace) had placed his hand; that had remained totally black.252 

The  Third:  ‘Abd  al-Rahman  b.  Zayd  b.  al-Khattab  was  both  small  and  ugly. 
God’s Messenger (UWBP) touched his head with his  hand and prayed. Through the 
blessing of his prayer, ‘Abdurrahman acquired the loftiest stature and most beautiful 
form.253 

The Fourth: ‘A’idh b. ‘Amr received a wound on the  face during the Battle of 
Hunayn. God’s Messenger (UWBP) wiped away the blood on his face with his hand. 
The  part  of  his  face  that  the  Messenger  (UWBP)  had  touched  acquired  a  shining 
brilliance,  which  the  scholars  of  Hadith described  as  resembling  a white  blaze  on  a 
chestnut horse.254 

The  Fifth:  He  passed  his  hand  over  Qatada  b.  Malhan’s  face  and  prayed,  and 

Qatada’s face began to shine like a mirror.255 

The Sixth: When Zaynab, the daughter of the Mother of Believers Umm Salama 
and the stepdaughter of God’s Messenger (UWBP) was a child, he sprinkled some of 
his  ablution  water  on  her  face.  With  the  touch  of  the  water,  her  face  acquired  an 
extraordinary beauty.256 

There are numerous further examples similar to these, most of which have been 
narrated by the leading scholars of Hadith. Even if we suppose each of these instances 
to be a single report and weak, as a whole they still demonstrate an absolute miracle 
of  Muhammad  (UWBP)  that  has  the  certainty  of  ‘consensus  in  meaning.’  For  if  an 
event  is  narrated  in  numerous  different  forms,  the  occurrence  of  the  basic  event 
becomes definite. Even if each is weak, it still proves the basic event.  

For example, a noise was heard; some people said that a house had col 

                                                 
251 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 334; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 673. 
252 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 334; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 674. 
253 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 335; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 676-7. 
254 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 334; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 412; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 
487. 
255 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 334; al-‘Asqalani, al-Isaba, iii, 225; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, v, 
319. 
256 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 334; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 163; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, 
ix, 259. 

 

185

lapsed. Others said it was a different house, and so on. Each narration may be a single 
report, and weak, and untrue, but the basic event was that a house had collapsed; that 
was  certain  and  they  were  unanimous  concerning  it.  However,  the  six  instances  we 
enumerated  above  were both  authentic,  and  some  of  them became  famous.  Suppose 
we  consider  each  of  them  to  be  weak,  all  together  they  demonstrate  the  certain 
occurrence of an absolute miracle of Muhammad (UWBP), like the absolute collapse 
of the house in the comparison. 

Thus, God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) performed 
definite, evident miracles from every category. The instances of them are the forms or 
examples of those universal and absolute miracles. Just as the Messenger’s (UWBP) 
hand,  fingers,  spittle,  breath,  and  speech,  that  is,  his  prayer,  were  the  means  of 
numerous miracles, so too, his other subtle faculties and emotions and senses were the 
means  of  many  wonders.  The  books  of  biography  and  history  have  described  them 
and  demonstrated  that  in  his  conduct,  physical  being,  and  senses  were  many 
evidences of his prophethood.  

FIFTEENTH SIGN 

Just  as  rocks,  trees,  the  moon  and  the  sun  recognized  God’s  Noble  Messenger 
(Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  and  affirmed  his  prophethood  by  each 
demonstrating a miracle, so too, animals, the dead, the jinn, and the angels recognized 
that  blessed  person  and  affirmed  his  prophethood.  For  by  each  of  those  species  of 
beings displaying a number of miracles, they demonstrated that they recognized him 
and  they  proclaimed  their  affirmation  of  his  prophethood.  This  Fifteenth  Sign 
contains three branches. 

F i r s t  B r a n c h  

The animal realm recognized God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings 
and peace) and displayed his miracles. There are numerous examples of this Branch. 
Here as examples, we shall mention only those which are well-known and definite to 
the  degree  of  ‘consensus  in  meaning,’  or  have  been  accepted  by  authoritative 
scholars, or have been deemed acceptable by the Muslim community. 

The First Incident: This is well-known to the degree of ‘consensus in meaning,’ 
and concerns the two pigeons coming and waiting at the entrance to the cave of Hira, 
where  God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  and  Abu  Bakr  the 
Veracious hid from the pursuing unbelievers, and the spider veiling the entrance with 
a thick web, like a curtain holder. Ubayy b. Khalaf, one of the leaders of the Quraysh 
whom  

 

186

God’s Messenger (UWBP) killed with his own hand at the Battle of Badr,257 looked at 
the  cave. When  his  companions  suggested  that they  enter,  he  replied:  “Why  should 
we?  I  see  a  large  spider’s  web  which  appears  to  have  been  there  since  before 
Muhammad was born. And look, those two pigeons are there. Would they perch there 
if there was someone in the cave?”258 

In  an  instance  similar  to  this,  a  blessed  pigeon  cast  a  shadow  over  the  head  of 
God’s Messenger (UWBP) during the conquest of Mecca, which was related by Imam 
Jalil b. Wahab.259 

Also according to a sound narration, ‘A’isha al-Siddiqa relates: “We had a bird in 
our house called a da\jin, similar to a pigeon. When God’s Messenger (Upon whom 
be  blessings  and  peace)  was  present  it  would  stay  quiet,  but  as  soon  as  he  left  the 
house,  it  would  start  hopping  to  and  fro  without  stopping.”260  Thus,  the  bird  was 
obedient to the Messenger (UWBP), remaining quiet in his presence. 

The Second Incident: This is the extraordinary story of the wolf, which has been 
narrated  through  a  number  of  chains  of  transmission  from  some  well-known 
Companions and about which there is ‘consensus in meaning.’ In short, Abu Sa‘id al-
Khudri,  Salama  b.  al-Akwa‘,  Ibn  Abi  Wahab,  and  Abu  Hurayra,  and  Uhban,  a 
shepherd  who  was  involved  in  another  event,  relate  through  numerous  chains  of 
transmission: “A wolf seized a goat and the shepherd saved it from the wolf. The wolf 
exclaimed:  ‘Don’t  you  fear  God?  You  have  deprived  me  of  my  sustenance!’  The 
shepherd  muttered  to  himself:  ‘How  strange!  Can  wolves  speak?’  The  wolf  said  to 
him: ‘You’re the strange one, for beyond the hill someone is calling you to Paradise. 
He is a Messenger of God, yet you do not recognize him!’” Although all the lines of 
transmission agree on the wolf’s  speech, in  his report, which  has a  strong  line, Abu 
Hurayra says:  “The  shepherd said to the wolf: ‘I  am going to see him, but who will 
look after my goats?’ The wolf replied: ‘I’ll look after them.’ So the shepherd handed 
over  the  herd  to  the  wolf  and  went  to  see  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings and peace), believed in  him, and returned to his  herd. The shepherd found 
the wolf; not a goat had  

                                                 
257 Musnad, iii, 219-20. 
258 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 313; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 368; Musnad, i, 248; San’ani, al-
Musannaf, v, 389; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, iii, 179-81; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, 
vii, 27; Ibn al-Qayyim, Zad al-Ma’ad (Tahqiq: Arnavudi), iii, 52; al-Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih, no: 
5934; Maruzi, Musnad Abu Bakr al-Siddiq, no: 73; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, vi, 52-3. 
259 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 313; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 637. 
260 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 309; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 632; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 79; 
al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 403. 

 

187

been lost. So he slaughtered one for the wolf, for it had become his teacher.”261 

According  to  one  chain  of  transmission,  one  of  the  chiefs  of  Quraysh,  Abu 
Sufyan, and Safwan saw a wolf pursuing a gazelle into the enclosure of the Ka‘ba. As 
it  returned,  the  wolf  spoke,  telling  of  the  messengership  of  Muhammad  (UWBP). 
They were astonished. Abu Sufyan said to Safwan: ‘Don’t let’s tell anyone about this; 
I’m frightened everyone will join him and Mecca will be emptied.’262 

In Short: The story of the wolf gives one complete conviction, and is as certain 

as those unanimous reports about which there is ‘consensus in meaning.’ 

The Third Incident: This is the narrative of the camel, which was unanimously 
related through some five or six chains of transmission by such famous Companions 
as  Abu  Hurayra,  Tha‘laba  b.  Malik,  Jabir  b.  ‘Abdullah,  ‘Abdullah  b.  Ja‘far,  and 
‘Abdullah b. Abi Awfa, who are at the start of the chains. A camel approached God’s 
Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace),  prostrated  itself  before  him  as  if 
saluting  him, and  spoke.  According  to  a  number of  lines  of  transmission,  the  camel 
had been angered in a garden and become wild, attacking anyone who approached it. 
When  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  appeared,  it  came  to  him,  prostrated  as  a  sign  of 
respect, and knelt down. He put a bridle on it, and the camel said to him: “They made 
me do the heaviest work and now they want to slaughter me. That’s why I went wild.” 
The Messenger (UWBP) asked its owner if this was true. “Yes,” he replied.263 

Also, God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) had a camel 
called  ‘Adba’.  After he  died,  out  of  its  grief,  the  camel  neither  ate  nor  drank,  till  it 
died.264 A number of important authorities including Abu Ishaq Isfara’ini related that 
it spoke with the Messenger (UWBP) about a certain story.265 In another instance, in 
an authentic narration, Jabir b. ‘Abdullah’s camel became exhausted on a journey and 
could no longer continue. God’s Messenger (UWBP) gave it a slight prod. Such joy 
and  

                                                 
261 Musnad, iii, 83, 88; Musnad (Tahqiq: Ahmad Shakir), xv, 202-3, nos: 8049, 11864, 11867; Qadi 
Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 310; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 467; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, viii, 144; al-Haythami, 
Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 291-2. 
262 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 311; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 84. 
263 Darimi, Muqaddima, 4; Musnad, iv, 173; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 4; al-Sa’ati, al-Fath 
al-Rabbani, xxii, 50-1; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 87; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, vi, 135; 
al-Albani, Silsilat al-Ahadith al-Sahiha, 485; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 99, 100, 618. 
264 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 313. 
265 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 637. 

 

188

nimbleness did the camel receive from that prod of the Prophet (UWBP) that due to 
its speed it could not be caught up with, nor could its reins be seized.266 

The  Fourth  Incident:  The  authorities  on  Hadith  and  foremost  Bukhari  report 
that  it was rumoured one  night that the enemy was attacking outside Medina. Brave 
horsemen  went  out  to  investigate.  On  the  way  they  saw  someone  coming.  They 
looked and saw that it was the Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace). He 
told  them  there  was  nothing.  He  had  mounted  Abu  Talha’s  famous  horse,  as  his 
sacred  courage  impelled  him  to,  and  had  gone  before  everyone  else  to  investigate, 
then  returned.  He  told  Abu  Talha:  “Your  horse  is  extremely  swift and  unfaltering.” 
Whereas previously it had been extremely slow. After that night, there was no horse 
to compete with it.267 On another occasion, as related in an authentic narration, while 
on a  journey  at the time  for prayer, the Noble Messenger (UWBP) told his  horse to 
stop. It stopped, and until he had finished praying the horse did not make the slightest 
movement.268 

The  Fifth  Incident:  Safina,  the  servant  of  the  Noble  Prophet  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace),  was  commanded  by  him  to  go  to  the  Governor  of  Yemen, 
Mu‘adh b. Jabal. He set off and on the way encountered a lion. Safina said to it: “I am 
the  servant  of  God’s  Messenger!”  Upon  which  the  lion  made  a  sound  as  if  saying 
something,  and  left  without  molesting  him.  According  to  another  narration,  Safina 
lost  his  way  when  returning,  and  met  with  a  lion.  Not  only  did  the  lion  not  molest 
him, it showed him the way.269 

Also,  it  is  narrated  from  ‘Umar  that  he  said:  “A  beduin  came  to  the  Noble 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace). He was  holding a  lizard. He said: 
‘If  this  reptile  testifies  to  you,  I  shall  believe  in  you;  otherwise  I  will  not.’  God’s 
Messenger  (UWBP)  asked  the  lizard,  and  it  testified  to  his  messengership  most 
eloquently.”270 

Also, the Mother of Believers, Umm Salama relates: “A gazelle spoke  

                                                 
266 Muslim, Mithaqat, 109, no: 715; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 145. 
267 Bukhari, Jihad, 46, 82; Adab, 39; Muslim, Fada’il, 48, no: 2307; Ibn Maja, Jihad, 9; Abu Da’ud, 
Adab, 87, no: 4988; Tirmidhi, Fada’il al-Jihad, nos: 1685-7. 
268 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 315; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 95. 
269 Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih, iii, 199, no: 5949; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 606; al-‘Asqalani, al-
Matalib al-‘Aliya, iv, 125 no: 4127; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 366-7; Abu Nu’aym, Hilyat 
al-Awliya,  i, 368-9; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, vi, 147. 
270 al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 293-4; al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, xii, 358; Ibn Kathir, al-
Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, vi, 149-60; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 632; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 
79. 

 

189

with the Noble Messenger (UWBP), and testified to his messengership.”271 

Thus,  there  are  numerous  examples  similar  to  these.  We  have  described  a  few 
that  are  famous  and  certain.  To  those  who  do  not  recognize  and  obey  the  Noble 
Messenger (UWBP), we say this: O man! Take a lesson from these! The lion and the 
wolf  recognized  and  obeyed  him;  you,  then,  should  try  not  to  fall  lower  than  an 
animal! 

S e c o n d  B r a n c h  

This  concerns  corpses,  jinns,  and  angels  recognizing  God’s  Noble  Messenger 
(Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace).  There  were  very  many  instances  of  this.  We 
shall  describe  a  few  examples  which  are  famous  and  have  been  related  by  reliable 
scholars, firstly about corpses. As for jinns and angels, the many reports concerning 
them are unanimous, and examples of them number not one but a thousand. And so, 
examples of the dead speaking: 

The  First  is  this:  Hasan  al-Basri,  an  important  and  loyal  student  of  Imam  ‘Ali 
and the greatest authority among the scholars of the external and esoteric sciences in 
the  time  of  the  generation  subsequent  to  the  Companions,  related:  “A  man  came 
weeping to God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace). He said: ‘I had a 
little girl; she drowned in such-and-such stream nearby. I left her there.’ He pitied the 
man and said they would go there together. They went, and the Messenger (UWBP) 
called to the dead girl, saying her name. At once the dead girl replied: ‘I am present 
and answer your call gladly.’ He asked her: ‘Do you want to return to your father and 
mother?’ She replied: ‘No, I have found something better here!’”272 

The Second: Important authorities like Imam Bayhaqi and Imam b. ‘Adiyy relate 
from Anas b. Malik: Anas said: “An elderly woman  had a single son who suddenly 
died. The righteous woman was very grieved and prayed: ‘O God, I left my home and 
migrated  here  only  to  obtain  Your  pleasure  and  to  pay  allegiance  to  God’s  Noble 
Messenger (UWBP) and to serve him. For the sake of Your Messenger, return my son 
to me, who was the only person to look after me.’” Anas said: “The dead man rose up 
and came and ate with us.”273  

In the  following lines from the celebrated poem Qasidat al-Burda, Imam Busiri 

refers to this extraordinary event: “Were his wonders to corre 

                                                 
271 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 314; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 91; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, 
viii, 295. 
272 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 320; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 106. 
273 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 320; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, vi, 292. 

 

190

spond  to  his  virtue  in  greatness  /  Mere  mention  of  his  name  would  have  animated 
decayed bones.” 

The  Third:  Scholars  like  Imam  Bayhaqi  relate  from  ‘Abdullah  b.  ‘Ubaydullah 
al-Ansari: ‘Abdullah said: “I was present when Thabit b. Qays b. Shammas fell as a 
martyr in the Battle of Yamama and was buried. As he was being put in his grave, a 
voice suddenly  came  from him, saying: ‘Muhammad is the Messenger of God, Abu 
Bakr  is  the  Veracious  [Siddiq],  ‘Umar,  the  martyr,  and  ‘Uthman,  pious  and 
merciful.’274  We  uuncovered  him  and  looked:  he  was  dead  and  lifeless,  yet  he  was 
foretelling ‘Umar’s martyrdom even before he had succeeded to the Caliphate. 

The Fourth: Imam Tabarani, and Abu Nu‘aym in his Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, relate 
from  Nu‘man  b.  Bashir:  “Zayd  b.  Kharija  suddenly  dropped  down  dead  in  the 
marketplace.  We  took  his  body  to  his  house.  That  evening  between  sunset  and  the 
night prayer, while the women were weeping all around him, he exclaimed: ‘Silence! 
Silence!’  Then,  saying:  ‘Muhammad  is  God’s  Messenger!  Peace  be  upon  you,  O 
Messenger of God!’, he spoke most eloquently for a while. We looked: he was dead, 
without life.”275 

Thus,  if  lifeless  corpses  affirm  his  prophethood  and  the  living  do  not,  for  sure 

they are more dead than the dead and more lifeless than corpses! 

As  regards  angels  appearing  and  serving  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP),  and  jinns 
believing  in  him  and  obeying  him,  these  facts  have  been  reported  numerously  and 
unanimously. They have been stated explicitly in many verses of the Qur’an.276 At the 
Battle of Badr, according to the Qur’an,277 five thousand angels served him as soldiers 
in  the  front  line,  like  the  Companions.  Indeed,  those  angels  acquired  distinction 
among the angels, like the men who fought in the battle.278 There are two aspects to 
be considered in this matter: 

The First is the fact that the existence of the different sorts of jinn and angels is 
as definite as that of the varieties and species of animals and human beings, and that 
they  have  relations  with  us.  We  have  proved  this  decisively  in  the  Twenty-Ninth 
Word as certainly as two plus two equals four, and we refer their proof to that Word. 

                                                 
274 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 320; ^Alê al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 649; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-
Nihaya, vi, 157-8. 
275 Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, viii, 291 (through various lines); al-Haythami, Majma’ al-
Zawa’id, v, 179-80 (through two lines of transmission). 
276 See, Qur’an, 3:123-5; 72:1-2; 46:29. 
277 See, Qur’an, 3:123-5. 
278 Bukhari, Maghazi, 11. 

 

191

The  Second  Aspect  is  members  of  God’s  Messenger’s  (UWBP)  community 

seeing them and speaking with them, as a miracle of his. 

Thus,  the  leading  scholars  of  Hadith,  and  foremost  Bukhari  and  Muslim, 
unanimously  relate: “One  time,  an  angel,  that  is,  Gabriel,  appeared  in  the  form of  a 
man  dressed  in  white.  He  approached  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP),  who  was  sitting 
among  his  Companions,  and  asked:  ‘What  is  Islam?  What  is  belief?  And  what  is 
goodness?  Explain  them.’  The  Messenger  (UWBP)  explained  them,  and  the 
Companions  gathered  there  both  received  valuable  instruction,  and  saw  the  person 
clearly.  Although  he  seemed  like a  traveller,  he  displayed  no sign of  a  journey.  He 
suddenly rose and disappeared. God’s Messenger (UWBP) then said: ‘Gabriel did that 
in order to teach you!’”279 

Also,  the  authorities  on  Hadith  relate  through  certain  and  authentic  narrations 
about  which  there  is  ‘consensus  in  meaning:’  “The  Companions  saw  Gabriel  with 
God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  many  times  in  the  form  of  Dihya,  who  was  very 
handsome.”  For  instance,  ‘Umar,  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Usama  b.  Zayd,  Harith,  ‘A’isha  al-
Siddiqa,  and  Umm  Salama  established  and  related  certainly:  “We  frequently  saw 
Gabriel with the God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) in the form 
of Dihya.”280 Is it at all possible that such people would say that they had seen him if 
they had not? 

Also,  the  conqueror  of  Persia,  Sa‘d  b.  Abi  Waqqas,  who  was  one  of  the  ten 
promised Paradise, relates  in an authentic  narration: “At the Battle of  Uhud we saw 
two  white-dressed  persons  either  side  of  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP),  guarding  him 
like sentries. We understood that they were the angels, Gabriel and Michael.”281 Is it 
possible that if such a hero of Islam says he saw them, he had not seen them? 

Also, Abu Sufyan b. Harith b. ‘Abd al-Muttalib, the Prophet’s (UWBP) cousin, 
relates in an authentic narration: “At the Battle of Badr, we saw horsemen dressed in 
white between the sky and the earth.”282 

Also, Hamza pleaded with the Noble Messenger (UWBP) to see Gabriel. So he 
showed him to Hamza in the Ka‘ba, but he could not endure it and fell to the ground 
unconscious.283 

                                                 
279 Bukhari, Iman, 37; Muslim, Iman, 1-7. 
280 Bukhari, Fada’il al-Ashab, 30; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 276-7; Ahmad b. Hanbal, 
Fada’il al-Sahaba (Tahqiq: Wasiyyullah), nos: 1817, 1853, 1918; Musnad, i, 212; al-‘Asqalani, al-
Isaba, i, 598. 
281 Bukhari, Maghazi, 18; Libas, 24; Muslim, Fada’il, 46-7, no: 2306; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 361. 
282 Musnad, i, 147, 353; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 362; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 281; ‘Ali al-Qari, 
Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 735. 
283 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 362; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 282; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 736. 

 

192

There  were  numerous  occurrences  like  these  of  angels  being  seen.  They  all 
demonstrated  one  sort  of  the  miracles  of  Muhammad  (UWBP),  and  show  that  the 
angels too were like moths drawn to the lamp of his prophethood. 

When  it  comes  to  jinns,  it  was  not  only  the  Companions,  it  frequently  happens 
that ordinary members of the Muslim community meet with them and see them. But 
the most certain and authentic reports are given us by the leading scholars of Hadith, 
who say: Ibn Mas‘ud related: “I saw the jinn on the night they accepted Islam at Batn 
al-Nakhl.  I  likened  them  to  the  Zut,  a  tall-statured  Sudanese  tribe;  they  resembled 
them.”284 

There was also the incident concerning Khalid b. al-Walid, which is famous and 
has been authenticated and accepted by the leading scholars of Hadith: when the idol 
called  ‘Uzza  was  destroyed,  a  jinn  came  out  of  it  in  the  form  of  a  black  woman. 
Khalid  cut  it  into  two  with  his  sword.  The  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings and peace) said in connection with this: “They used to worship it inside the 
idol ‘Uzza; it can no longer be worshipped.”285 

Also, is a narration from ‘Umar: he said: “While we were with God’s Messenger 
(UWBP),  a  jinn  called  Hama  came  in  the  form  of  an  old  man  carrying  a  staff;  he 
accepted  Islam.  The  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace) 
instructed him in some of the short Suras of the Qur’an, which he listened to and then 
departed.”286 Some scholars of Hadith have questioned this last incident, but the most 
important  of  them  declared  it  to  be  authentic.  In  any  event,  it  is  unnecessary  to 
describe this sort at length, for the examples of it are many. We would only add this: 

Through the light of God’s Noble Messenger (UWBP), through his training and 
through following him, thousands of spiritual poles and purified scholars like Shaikh 
‘Abd al-Qadir Gilani have met and spoken with angels and jinn. This fact has reached 
the degree of consensus a hundred times over through innumerable instances.287 Yes, 
members of Muhammad’s (UWBP) community being in contact with angels and jinn, 
and  speaking with  them,  occurs  through  the  miraculous  guidance  and  instruction  of 
the Noble Messenger (UWBP).  

                                                 
284 Musnad (Tahqiq: Ahmad Shakir), vi, 165, no: 4353; Suyuti, al-Khasa’is al-Kubra, i, 343; ii, 361. 
285 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 362; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 287; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 738; 
Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, iv, 316; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, vi, 176. 
286 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 363; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 287; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, v, 
416-8. 
287 Ibn Taymiyya, al-Tawassul wa’l-Wasila, 24; Ibn Taymiyya, Majmu’ al-Fatawa, xi, 307. 

 

193

T h i r d  B r a n c h  

The  protection  and  preservation  of  God’s Messenger  (Upon  whom  be blessings 
and  peace)  was  a  clear  miracle,  and  many  instances  of  it  are  indicated  by  the  clear 
truth of the verse, “And God will defend you from men.”(5:67) For sure, when God’s 
Messenger (UWBP) appeared, he was not only challenging one group, or one people, 
or a few rulers, or one religion; he was rather challenging single-handed all kings and 
the  people  of  all  religions.  And  yet  until  he  died  in  perfect  ease  and  happiness  and 
rose to the heavenly  court, for twenty-three  years he was without guard or protector 
and  was exposed to  numerous plots, with  his  own  uncle  his  greatest  enemy  and  his 
own  tribe  and  people  hostile  to  him.  This  shows  what  a  powerful  truth  the  above-
mentioned verse expresses and what a firm point of support it was. We shall mention 
as examples only a few events classed as definite. 

First  Event:  Scholars  of  Hadith  and  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  biography  report 
unanimously that the Quraysh had made a certain agreement to kill God’s Messenger 
(Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace).  Upon  the  suggestion  of  a  demon  in  human 
form,  so  as  to  prevent  discord  within  the  Quraysh,  at  least  one  member  of  every 
branch of the tribe formed a group of nearly two hundred men under the leadership of 
Abu  Jahl  and  Abu  Lahab,  and  they  staged  a  surprise  attack  on  the  Messenger’s 
(UWBP) house. ‘Ali was together with him. He had told him to sleep that night in his 
bed.  The  Messenger  (UWBP)  waited  till  the  Quraysh  came  and  completely 
surrounded  the  house,  then  he  went  out  and  threw  a  handful  of  earth  at  their  heads, 
and not one of them saw him. He passed through them and disappeared.288 When he 
reached the cave of Hira, two pigeons and a spider became his guards, and protected 
him against all the Quraysh.289 

The Second Event: It certainly occurred that when they emerged from the cave 
and set off towards Medina, they were followed by a very brave man called Suraqa, 
who,  for  a  large  reward,  had  been  sent  by  the  leaders  of  the  Quraysh  to  kill  them. 
God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) and Abu Bakr the Veracious 
had seen Suraqa coming when they came out of the cave. Abu Bakr had been anxious, 
but God’s Messenger (UWBP) said: “Do not be anxious, God is with us!”(9:40), as he 
had in the  

                                                 
288 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 349; Musnad (Tahqiq: Ahmad Shakir), iv, 269, no: 2009; al-Haythami, 
Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ii, 228. 
289 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 313; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 368; Musnad, i, 248; San’ani, al-
Musannaf, v, 389; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, iii, 179-81; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, 
vii, 27; Ibn al-Qayyim, Zad al-Ma’ad (Tahqiq: Arnavu\dê), iii, 52; al-Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih, no: 
5934; Maruzi, Musnad Abu Bakr al-Siddiq, no: 73; Zayla’i, Nasb al-Ra’ya, i, 123; al-Haythami, 
Majma’ al-Zawa’id, vi, 52-3. 

 

194

cave. Abu Bakr looked at Suraqa: his horse’s hooves were stuck in the sand. He was 
freed and started following them again. Then again the horse became transfixed, and 
something like smoke was rising from where its hooves were stuck. At that point he 
understood  that  it  was  beyond  his  power  and  anyone  else’s  power  to  harm  God’s 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace). He cried for mercy. The Messenger 
(UWBP) freed him, but said: “Go back, but make sure no one else comes after us.”290 
In connection with this incident, we should also mention that a shepherd spotted 
them and immediately set off for Mecca to inform the Quraysh. But on arriving at the 
city,  he  forgot  why  he  had  come.  No  matter  how  much  he  tried,  he  could  not 
remember. He was obliged to return. Then later he understood that he had been made 
to forget it.291 

The Third Event: The leading scholars of Hadith relate through many chains of 
transmission  that  at  the  Battle  of  Ghatafan  and  Anmar,  a  bold  tribal  chief  called 
Ghurath  got  close  to  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace) 
without anyone seeing him, his sword ready in his hand. He said to God’s Messenger 
(UWBP): “Who will save you from me?” God’s Messenger (UWBP) replied: “God!” 
Then  he prayed:  “O  God,  save  me  from  him,  if  You  thus  will!”  Suddenly,  Ghurath 
received  a  blow  from  the  Unseen  between  the  shoulders  and  his  sword  fell  to  the 
ground.  The  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  picked  up  the 
sword and said: “Now who will save  you from me?” Then he forgave him. The man 
returned to his tribe. Everyone was astonished at the bold, valiant fighter, and asked 
him  what  had  happened  to  him  and  why  he  had  done  nothing.  He  replied  to  them: 
“That’s the way it happened. I have come now from the best of men.”292 

In an  incident similar to this at the  Battle of Badr, a dissembler approached the 
Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) from behind when no one was 
aware  of  it.  Just  as  he  was  raising  his  sword  to  strike,  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP) 
turned and looked at him; the man trembled and his sword slipped to the ground.293 

The  Fourth  Event:  This  is  well-known  almost  to  the  degree  of  ‘consensus  in 
meaning,’ and is  given by most Qur’anic commentators as the  immediate reason for 
the revelation of the verse, “Indeed We have put yokes  

                                                 
290 Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; Muslim, Zuhd, 75; Ibn Hibban, Sahih 65; 9:11. 
291 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 351; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 715. 
292 Bukhari, Jihad, 84, 87; Maghazi, 31-2; Muslim, Salat al-Musafirin, 311, no: 843; Qadi Iyad, al-
Shifa’, i, 347-8; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 7-8; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 29-30. 
293 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 347; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 710. 

 

195

round  their  necks  right  up  their  chins,  so  that  their  heads  are  forced  up  [and  they 
cannot  see].  And  We  have  put  a  bar  in  front  of  them  and  a  bar  behind  them,  and 
further, We have covered them up, so that they cannot see.”(36:8-9) It is also related 
by the most learned commentators and scholars of Hadith. They relate that Abu Jahl 
took an oath, saying: “I shall strike Muhammad with a stone if I see him prostrating.” 
He took a large stone and went to find God’s Messenger (UWBP). He lifted his hands 
to  cast  the  stone  when  he  saw  him  prostrating,  and  they  remained  raised.  God’s 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) stood up on completing the prayers, 
and  Abu  Jahl’s  hand  was  released.  He  could  move  it  either  because  the  Messenger 
(UWBP) permitted, or because there was no longer any need for it to remain thus.294 

In a similar incident, a man from the same tribe as Abu Jahl, al-Walid b. Mughira 
according to one narration, went to the Ka‘ba with a large stone in his hand, to strike 
the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) while he was prostrating, 
but the man’s eyes were sealed and he could not see the Messenger (UWBP) entering, 
nor was he able to see the people who had sent him; he could only hear their voices. 
When God’s Messenger (UWBP) finished praying, his eyes were opened, for no need 
remained for them to be sealed.295 

Also,  it  is  related  through  an  authentic  narration  from  Abu  Bakr  the  Veracious 
that  after  the  Sura  about  Abu  Lahab296  had  been  revealed,  his  wife,  “Hammalat  al-
Hatab” (the wood carrier) Umm Jamil, came to the Ka‘ba with a stone  in  her  hand. 
She  saw  Abu  Bakr,  who  was  sitting  beside  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace),  and  asked  him,  “Where’s  your  friend?  I  hear  that  he  mocked 
me. If I see him, I will hit him in the mouth with this rock.” She could not see God’s 
Messenger (UWBP), although he was sitting beside him.297 Of course, a wood-carrier 
of Hell  like that could not enter the presence of “the Sultan of Lawlak,”298 who was 
under divine protection, and see him. How could she? 

The Fifth Event: It is related through a sound narration that ‘Amir b. Tufayl and 

Arbad b. Qays conspired to assassinate God’s Noble Messenger  

                                                 
294 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 351; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 241; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, 
viii, 227; Muslim, No: 2797; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, iii, 42-3. 
295 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 351; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 242. 
296 Sura 111, al-Masad. 
297 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 349; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 233; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id,  
i, 353; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, viii, 152; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 361. 
298 This refers to the Hadith Qudsi: “But for thee, but for thee, I would not have created the spheres.” 
(Tr.) 

 

196

(Upon whom be blessings and peace). ‘Amir said: “I’ll keep him busy, and you strike 
him.” They went, but Arbad did not do anything. Amir asked him later why he did not 
strike  him. Arbad answered: “How could I? Every  time  I  intended to hit  him, I saw 
you between us. How could I have struck you?”299 

The  Sixth  Event:  It  is  related  through  an  authentic  narration  that  at  the  battle 
either of Uhud or Hunayn, Shayba b. ‘Uthman al-Hajabayya, whose uncle and father 
Hamza  had  killed,  crept  up  stealthily  on  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace)  in  order  to  avenge  them.  On  his  raising    his  drawn  sword,  it 
suddenly slipped from his hand. God’s Messenger (UWBP) turned and looked at him, 
putting his hand on his chest. Shayba later said: “At that moment there was no one in 
the world I loved more.” He believed in him. The Messenger (UWBP) told him to go 
and fight. Shayba said: “I went and fought in front of God’s Messenger (UWBP). If I 
had come across my own father at that time, I would have struck him!”300 

Also,  on  the  day  of  the  conquest  of  Mecca,  a  man  called  Fadala  approached 
God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) with the intention of striking 
him. The Messenger (UWBP) looked at him, and said, smiling: “What have you told 
yourself?”, praying that he might be forgiven. Fadala became a believer, and said: “At 
that moment there was no one in the world I loved more.”301 

The Seventh Event: According to a sound narration, at the  very moment some 
Jews, with the  intention of assassinating  him, were going to drop down a large rock 
on  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  while  he  was 
sitting, he rose through divine protection; so the plot came to nothing.302 

There  were  many  events  similar  to  these  seven.  The  scholars  of  Hadith,  and 
foremost  Imam  Bukhari  and  Imam  Muslim,  relate  from  ‘A’isha  that  after  the  verse, 
“And God will defend you from men”(5:67) was revealed, God’s Messenger (UWBP) 
told those who  

                                                 
299 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 353; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 249; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, v, 
318 
300 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 353; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 248; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, 
vi, 183-4; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 718; al-‘Asqalani, al-Isaba, ii, 157. 
301 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 352; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 248; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 718. 
302 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 353; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 243; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 716; 
Abu Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 489-90. 

 

197

guarded  him  from  time  to  time:  “O  men,  leave  me,  for  God, the  Great  and  Mighty, 
protects me!”303 

Thus,  from  the  beginning  up  to  here,  this  treatise  shows  that  every  species  of 
being,  every  realm  of  creation  in  the  universe,  recognized  the  Noble  Messenger 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace), and was connected with him. His miracles were 
manifested in every one of them. This means that the person of Muhammad (UWBP) 
was the official and Messenger of God Almighty, but in regard to His titles of Creator 
of  the  Universe  and  Sustainer  of  all  Creatures.  For  example,  every  office  or 
department of government knows and recognizes a high-ranking official, an inspector, 
of the king, and whichever of them he enters, those in it show an interest in him, for 
he  acts  in  the  name  of  the  king  of  all  of  them.  If  he  is  only  an  inspector  in  the 
judiciary, then only that department of government recognizes him; the other offices 
do not. And if he is an inspector in the army, the civil service does not recognize him. 
It is understood, then, that all the realms and spheres of divine rule, every species and 
group from the angels to the flies and spiders, knew and recognized God’s Messenger 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace), or had been informed about him. That is to say, 
he was the Seal of the Prophets and the Messenger of the Sustainer of All the Worlds. 
And his messengership was more comprehensive and all-embracing than those of the 
preceding prophets. 

The wonders that took place before his prophetic mission, but which were related 
to it, are called irhasat, and these too were indications and proofs of his prophethood. 
They were of three kinds:  

SIXTEENTH SIGN 

The First Kind 

This kind of irhasat comprises the tidings of Muhammad’s (UWBP) prophethood 
given  by  the  Torah,  the  Bible,  the  Psalms  of  David,  and  the  scriptures  revealed  to 
other  prophets,  as  stated  by  the  Qur’an.  Indeed,  since  those  Books  are  revealed 
scriptures and those who brought them were prophets, it is necessary and certain that 
they should have mentioned the one who would supersede their religions, change the 
shape  of  the  universe,  and  illuminate  half  the  earth  with  the  light  he  brought.  Is  it 
possible that those scriptures, which foretold insignificant events, would not speak of 
the  most  important  phenomenon  of  humanity,  the  prophethood  of  Muhammad 
(UWBP)? Yes, since they would certainly speak of it, they would either denounce it 
as a falsehood and so save their religions from destruction and  

                                                 
303 Tirmidhi, v, 351, no: 3406; Tirmidhi (Tahqiq: Ahmad Shakir), no: 3049; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 352; 
al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 313. 

 

198

their books from abrogation, or they would affirm it, and through that man of truth, 
save their religions from superstition and corruption. Now, both friend and foe agree 
that there is no sign of any such denouncement in the scriptures, in which case there 
must  be  affirmation.  And  since  there  is  certain  affirmation,  and  since  there  is  a 
definite reason and fundamental cause for such affirmation, we too shall demonstrate 
through three categorical proofs the existence of this affirmation: 

F i r s t  P r o o f : God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) 
says to them through the tongue of the Qur’an: “Your scriptures describe and confirm 
me; they confirm me in the things I say.” He challenges them with verses such as, 

Say,  “Bring  the  Torah  and  read  it,  if  you  are  men  of  truth!”(3:93)  *  Say, 
“Come, let us gather together, our sons and your sons, our women and your 
women, ourselves and yourselves; then let us earnestly pray and invoke the 
curse of God on those who lie!”(3:61) 

Despite  his continuously taunting them with  verses such as these,  no Jewish scholar 
or Christian priest was able to show that he had made any error. If they had been able 
to, those  very  numerous and very obdurate and  jealous unbelievers and dissembling 
Jews  and  the  whole  world  of  unbelief  would  have  proclaimed  it  everywhere.  The 
Messenger (UWBP) also said: “Either you find any error of mine, or I shall fight you 
until  I  destroy  you!”  And  they  chose  war  and  wretchedness.  That  means  they  could 
not find any error. For if they had, they would have been saved from all that. 

S e c o n d  P r o o f : The words of the Torah, the Bible, and the Psalms do not 
have the miraculousness of those of the Qur’an. They have also been translated again 
and again, and a great many alien words have become intermingled with them. Also, 
the  words  of  commentators  and  their  false  interpretations  have  been  confused  with 
their  verses.  In  addition,  the  distortions  of  the  ignorant  and  the  hostile  have  been 
incorporated into them. In these ways, the corruptions and alterations have multiplied 
in those Books. In fact, Shaikh Rahmatullah al-Hindi, the well-known scholar, proved 
to  Jewish  and  Christian  scholars  and  priests  thousands  of  corruptions  in  them,  and 
silenced  them.  Nevertheless,  despite  these  corruptions,  in  our  times  the  celebrated 
Husain Jisri (May God have mercy on him) found one hundred and fourteen allusions 
to  the  prophethood  of  Muhammad  (UWBP),  and  included  them  in  his  al-Risala  al-
Hamidiya.  This  was  translated  into  Turkish  by  the  late  İsmail  Hakkı  of  Manastır; 
whoever wishes may refer to it.304 

                                                 
304 Husain Jisri, Risâle-i Hamidiye (Turk. trans.), 52-94. 

 

199

Also,  many  Jewish  and  Christian  scholars  acknowledged  and  admitted  that  the 
attributes  of  Muhammad  the  Arabian  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  were 
written in their scriptures.305 The famous Roman Emperor Heraclius, who was a non-
Muslim himself, said: “Jesus foretold Muhammad’s coming.”306 

Also,  another  Roman  ruler  called  Muqawqis,  the  Governor  of  Egypt,307  and 
celebrated  Jewish  scholars  and  leaders  such  as  Ibn  Suriya,  Zubayr  b.  Batiya,  Ibn 
Akhtab and his brother Ka‘b b. Asad, although remaining non-Muslim, admitted: “He 
is described in our Books.”308 

Also, some of the well-known Jewish scholars and Christian priests gave up their 
obduracy  on  seeing  Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  attributes  as  described  in  the  above-
mentioned books, and believed in him. They then pointed out these references to other 
Jewish  and  Christian  scholars,  and  convinced  them.  Among  them  were  the  famous 
‘Abdullah b. Salam, Wahb b. Munabbih, Abu Yasir, the two sons of Sa‘ya, Asid and 
Tha‘laba, and Shamul. The latter lived at the time of Tubba‘, the ruler of Yemen.309 
Shamul  became  a  believer  before  Muhammad’s  prophetic  mission  and  without  ever 
seeing him, just as Tubba‘ did. While the guest of the Bani Nadir before the prophetic 
mission, a gnostic called Ibn al-Hayyaban, declared: “A prophet will soon appear, and 
this is the place he will emigrate to.” He died there. Later, when that tribe was at war 
with God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace), Asid and Tha‘laba came 
forward and cried out to the tribe: “By God, he is the one Ibn al-Hayyaban promised 
would come. Don’t fight him!”310 But they did not heed him, and paid the penalty. 

Also, many Jewish scholars like Ibn Yasin, Mikhayriq, and Ka‘b al- 

                                                 
305 Ibn Hisham, al-Sirat al-Nabawiyya, i, 217; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 744; Qadi Iyad, al-
Shifa’, i, 363-5. 
306 Ibn Sayyid al-Nas, ‘Uyun al-Athar ii, 26; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’ i, 364; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, 
745. 
307 Suyuti, al-Khasa’is al-Kubra, ii, 139; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 366; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 
744-5; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, iv, 80, 81, 272; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, iii, 362; 
Waqidi, Kitab al-Maghazi, 403-4; Abu Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 85. 
308 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 366; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 744-5; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-
Nihaya, iv, 80-1; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, iii, 361-2; Waqidi, al-Maghazi 403-4; Ibn Jawzi, Sifat 
al-Safwa, iii, 361-2; Abu Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 79; ii, 492. 
309 Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 367; ii, 526; vi, 240-9; al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, xi, 401; xii, 
390-408; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 364; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 739-43; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-
Zawa’id, viii, 240. 
310 Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 80-1; iv, 31; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 744-5; Yusuf 
Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 137; Abu Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 82; Ibn al-Jawzi, Sifat 
al-Safwa, i, 87. 

 

200

Ahbar,  became  believers  on  seeing  the  prophetic  attributes  in  their  Books,  and 
silenced those who did not accept faith.311 

There  was  also  the  famous  Christian  scholar  and  monk,  Bahira,312  who  was 
mentioned above: God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) was twelve 
years  old  when  he  went  to  Damascus  with  his  uncle,  and  it  was  for  his  sake  that 
Bahira  invited  the  Quraysh.  For  he  had  seen  a  cloud  casting  its  shadow  on  the 
travelling caravan. When it continued to do so, he realized that the one he was seeking 
had remained with the caravan, and he sent someone to fetch him. He told Abu Talib: 
“Return to Mecca! The Jews are exceedingly jealous and will resort to treachery, for 
his attributes are described in the Torah.”313 

Also,  Nestor  the  Abyssinian,  and  the  ruler  of  that  country,  the  Negus,  came  to 

believe on seeing Muhammad’s attributes written in their Books.314 

Also, a well-known Christian scholar called Daghatr became a believer on seeing 
the  description of  the  Prophet  (UWBP),  and  was  martyred  when  he  proclaimed  this 
among the Byzantines.315 

Also,  from  the  Christian  leaders,  Harith  b.  Abi  Shumar  al-Ghasani  and  the 
prominent rulers and religious leaders of Damascus such as Sahib al-Ilya, Heraclius, 
Ibn Natur and al-Jarud, entered the fold of Islam after seeing the Prophet’s (UWBP) 
description  in  their  Books.316  Of  them,  only  Heraclius  concealed  his  belief,  for  the 
sake of worldly rule.317 

Also, like these, Salman al-Farsi had formerly been a Christian. He  

                                                 
311 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 364; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 739; Ibn al-Jawzi, Sifat al-Safwa, i, 87; 
Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 87-8, 135; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, 161-3; Abu 
Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 78-9. 
312 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 308; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 631; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 3 (Bab: Maja’ 
fi Badi’ al-Nubuwwa); al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi, no: 3699; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 615; 
Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabi, 115; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa ii, 24; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah 
‘ala’l-‘Alamin 158. 
313 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 3; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 6155-6; Ibn Hisham, al-Sirat al-Nabawiyya, i, 
191-4; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 27-9. 
314 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 364; ^Alê al-Qari Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 744. 
315 Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 367; ii, 526; vi, 240-9; al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, xi, 401; xii, 
390-408; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 364; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 739-43; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-
Zawa’id, viii, 240. 
316 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 744-5; Ibn Hisham, al-Sirat al-Nabawiyya, iv, 221-2; Abu Nu’aym, 
Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 101. 
317 Bukhari, Bad’ al-Wahy, 6; Shahadat, 28; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 744; Yusuf Nabhani, 
Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 121, 150-1; Qastalani, al-Mawahib al-Ladunniya, vi, 198; Tabarani, al-
Mu’jam al-Kabir, iii, 2108; Ibn ‘Adiyy, al-Kamil fi’l-Du’afa, iii, 1094; Abu Nu’aym, Dala’il al-
Nubuwwa, i, 101-2. 

 

201

searched for the Noble Messenger (UWBP) after seeing his description.318  

Also, a famous scholar called Tamim, and the well-known Abyssinian ruler, the 
Negus,  and  the  Abyssinian  Christians,  and  the  priests  of  Najran,  all  unanimously 
declared that they had seen the Prophet’s (UWBP) description in their scriptures, and 
had come to believe in him.319 

T h e  T h i r d  P r o o f :  Here, as examples, we shall point out from the Gospel, 
the  Torah,  and  the  Psalms,  a  few instances of  verses  concerning  our  Prophet  (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace). 

First: In the Psalms, there is the following verse: 

O God, send to us after the period between prophets one who will establish 
an exemplary model.320 

Here, “One who will establish an exemplary model” refers to the Prophet Muhammad 
(UWBP).  

A verse from the Gospels says: 

The Messiah said: “I am leaving for my father and your father, so that He 
may send you the Paraclete,”321 

that is, Ahmad Muhammad. 

A second verse from the Gospels: 

I ask from my Lord for the Paraclete that he may abide with you forever.322 

Paraclete,  meaning  the  distinguisher  of  good  from  evil,  is  the  name  of  our  Prophet 
(UWBP) in those Books. 

A verse from the Torah says: 

Verily  God  told  Abraham  that  Hagar  –  the  mother  of  Isma‘il  –  will  bear 
children. There will emerge from her sons one whose hand will  

                                                 
318 al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari, vii, 222; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 82; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya 
wa’l-Nihaya, ii, 310-6; Musnad, v, 437; Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabi,  i,  233; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, 
iii, 604; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 364; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 670; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah 
‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 144; Abu Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 258-64. 
319 al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari, vii, 222; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 82; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya 
wa’l-Nihaya, ii, 310-6; Musnad, v, 437; Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabi,  i,  233; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, 
iii, 604; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 364; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 670; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah 
‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 144; Abu Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 258-64. 
320 Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 104, 115. 
321 Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya i, 352; Jisri, Risale-i Hamidiye (Turkish trans.), i, 250; Qastalani, al-
Mawahib al-Ladunniya, vi, 201. 
322 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 743; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 99; Jisri, Risale-i 
Hamidiye, i, 255; Gospel of John, 14:16. 

 

202

be above all, and the hands of all will be opened to him in reverence.323 

Another verse from the Torah: 

And He said to Moses: “O Moses, verily I shall send them a prophet like you, 
from  the  sons  of  their  brothers  [the  children  of  Isma‘il];  I  shall  place  My 
word  in his  mouth, and  shall punish  whoever  does  not accept  the words of 
the one who will speak in My name.”324 

A third verse from the Torah: 

Moses  said:  “O  Lord!  Verily  I  have  found  in  the  Torah  the  best  of 
communities  that  will  emerge  for  the  benefit  of  humanity,  that  will  enjoin 
good  and  forbid  wrong,  and  that  will  believe  in  God.  Let  it  be  my 
community!” God said: “That is the community of Muhammad.”325 

A REMINDER: In those books, the name of Muhammad is given in Syriac form, 
such  as  Mushaffah,  Munhamanna,  Himyata,  and  names  meaning  Muhammad  in 
Hebrew.  Otherwise  the  name  of  Muhammad  is  explicitly  mentioned  only  in  a  few 
places, and was also altered by the jealous Jews.326 
A verse from the Psalms of David states: 

O  David!  A  prophet  will  appear  after  you,  named  Ahmad  Muhammad;  he 
will  be  truthful,  and  he  will  be  a  chief,  and  his  Community  will  be 
forgiven.327 

One of the Seven ‘Abdullah’s, ‘Abdullah b. ‘Amr b. al-‘As, who made extensive 
studies  of  the  earlier  scriptures,  and  ‘Abdullah  b.  Salam,  who  was  the  earliest  to 
accept  Islam  from  among  the  famous Jewish  scholars, and  the  famous scholar  Ka‘b 
al-Ahbar from among the Children of Israel, all pointed out in the Torah, which was 
not  then  corrupted  to  its  present  extent, the  following  verse,  which  after  addressing 
Moses, then addresses the prophet-yet-to-come: 

                                                 
323 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 743; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 105-6; Genesis, 
Chap. 16. 
324 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 743; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 86; Halabi, al-
Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 347; Deuteronomy, Chapter 18. 
325 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 746; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 107-18; Isaiah, 
Chapter 42. 
326 Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 112-3; Qastalani, al-Mawahib al-Ladunniya, vi, 189. 
327 Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 353; Kandahlawi, Hayat al-Sahaba, i, 18; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya 
wa’l-Nihaya, ii, 326; ‘Alê al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 739; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 
122. 

 

203

O Prophet, verily We have sent you as a witness, a bearer of glad tidings, a 
warner  and  a  protection  for  the  unlettered.  You  are  My  bondsman,  and  I 
have  named  you  the  Reliant  on  God.  You  shall  not  be  harsh,  stern,  and 
clamorous  in  the  market  places,  nor  shall  you  requite  evil  with  evil,  but 
instead  pardon  and  forgive.  God  shall  not  take  you  unto  Himself  until  you 
straighten a crooked people by causing them to say, “No god but God.”328 

Another verse from the Torah: 

Muhammad is God’s Messenger, his birthplace is Mecca, he will emigrate to 
Tayba,  his  rule  will  be  in  Damascus,  and  his  community  will  constantly 
praise God.329329 

In  this  verse,  a  Syriac  word  meaning  Muhammad  is  mentioned  for  the  word 
Muhammad. 

Here is another verse from the Torah: 

You  are  My  bondsman  and  messenger,  and  I  have  named  you  Reliant  on 
God,330 

which is addressed to a prophet who is to come after Moses, and is from the progeny 
of Isma‘il, the brother of Isaac. 

In the following verse from the Torah, 

My chosen bondsman is not harsh or stern,331 

the meaning of Mukhtar (chosen) is the same as Mustafa, a name of Muhammad. 

In  several  places  in  the  Gospels,332  a  prophet  who  will  come  after  Jesus  is 

referred to as “the Master of the World.” He is described as: 

He  will  have  with  him  a  staff  of  iron  with  which  he  will  fight,  as  will  his 
people.333 

This verse indicates that a prophet will come with a sword, charged with  

                                                 
328 Bukhari, Buyu\^, 5; Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 346; Darimi, Muqaddima, 2; Kandahlawi, 
Hayat al-Sahaba, i, 17; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, ii, 326; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-
‘Alamin, 105, 135; al-‘Ajurri, al-Shari’a, 444, 452; Qastalani, Mawahib al-Ladunniya, vi, 192; Isaiah, 
chap. 42. 
329 Darimi, Muqaddima, 2; Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 346-51; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 739; 
Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 116; Abu Na’êm, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 72. 
330 See, fn. 328. (This is part of the same verse.) 
331 Darimi, Muqaddima, 2; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 105, 119; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh 
al-Shifa’, i, 739. 
332 John, 14:30; 16:11. 
333 Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 99, 114. 

 

204

waging jihad. “Qadib min hadid (literally, staff of iron)” means sword. And so will be 
his community. In agreement with the Biblical verse mentioned above, and referring 
to it as well as some other verses, the following Qur’anic verse at the end of Sura al-
Fath also states that his community, like him, will be commanded to wage jihad: 

And  their  similitude  in  the  Gospel  is  like  a  seed  that  sends  forth  its  blade, 
then  makes  it  strong; it  then becomes  thick, and it  stands on  its  own  stem, 
filling the sowers with wonder and delight. As a result, it fills the unbelievers 
with rage at them.(48:29) 

In the thirty-third chapter of the fifth book of the Torah,334 there is the following 

verse:  

The Lord came from Sinai, rose up unto us from Sa‘ir, and shined forth from 
Mount Paran.335 

In this verse, with the phrase “the Lord came from Sinai,” the prophethood of Moses 
is  mentioned;  with  the  phrase  “rose up unto us  from Sa‘ir”  (Sa‘ir being  a  mountain 
near  Damascus),  the  prophethood  of  Jesus  is  indicated.  And  the  phrase  “He  shined 
forth from Mount Paran” (the Paran Mountains being the mountains of Hijaz), gives 
tidings  of  the  prophethood  of  Muhammad  (UWBP),  as  all  will  agree.  Moreover, 
confirming  the  sentence,  “This  is  their  similitude  in  the  Torah,”(48:29)  is  the 
following  verse  of  the  Torah  concerning  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  Companions,  who 
would shine forth from the Paran Mountains: 

The  flags  of  the  blessed  ones  will  be  with  him,  and  they  will  be  on  his 
right.336 

In  this  verse,  the  Companions  are  described  as  “the  blessed  ones,”  that  is,  his 
Companions are blessed, righteous men, the beloved ones of God. 

In the forty-second chapter of the Book of Isaiah, there are the following verses: 

See My servant, whom I uphold; My Chosen One, in whom I delight. He will 
reveal  justice  to  the  nations  of  the  world…  He  will  encourage  the 
fainthearted,  those  tempted  to  despair.  He  will  see  full  justice  given  to  all 
who  have  been  wronged.  He  will  not  be  satisfied  until  truth  and 
righteousness prevail throughout the earth, nor until even  

                                                 
334 Deuteronomy, 33:2. 
335 Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 348; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 90, 102-6; 
Qastalani, al-Mawahib al-Ladunniya, vi, 198. 
336 Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 348; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 113; 
Deuteronomy, 33:2. 

 

205

distant lands beyond the seas have put their trust in him.337 

Here, the verses explicitly describe Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings and peace), 
the prophet of the end of time. 

In the fourth chapter of the Book of Micah, are the following verses: 

But in the last days it shall come to pass that the mountain of the House of 
God will be the most renowned one of all the mountains of the world, praised 
by  all  nations;  people  from  all over  the  world  will  make  pilgrimage  there. 
“Come,” they will say to one another, “let us go up to the mountain of God 
and the House of God.”338 

These  verses  obviously  describe  the  most  blessed  mountain  in  the  world,  Mount 
‘Arafat, and the worship and proclamations of “God is Most Great!” of those making 
the  Hajj,  who  will  flock  there  from  all  climes,  and  the  Community  of  Muhammad, 
famous for the divine mercy it will receive. 

In the seventy-second chapter of the Psalms, there are the following verses: 

And he will reign from sea to sea, 
And from the river to the ends of the earth. 
The kings of Yemen and the Islands 
All will bring their gifts. 
And to him all the kings will prostrate themselves, 
All the nations will serve him. 
............................... 
And he will live, 
And on his behalf prayer will be made constantly, 
All day long he will be praised. 
............................... 
His name will prove to be to time indefinite, 
It will continue as long as the sun. 
All will be blessed in him, 
All nations will praise him.339 

These verses describe the Glory of the World, the Prophet Muhammad (UWBP) most 
evidently.  Apart  from  Muhammad  the  Arabian,  what  prophet  has  come  since  David 
(Upon whom be peace) who has spread his religion  

                                                 
337 Isaiah, 42:1-4, 10. 
338 Micah, 4:1-2. 
339 Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 91-104; Jisri, Risale-i Hamidiye (Turkish trans.), i, 
410; Psalms, 72:8, 10, 11, 15-17 

 

206

from  East  to  West,  made  kings  pay  tribute,  and  brought  rulers  to  submission  as 
though  prostrating;  to  whom  every  day  one  fifth  of  mankind  offer  benedictions  and 
prayers, and whose lights have irradiated from Medina? Has there been any other? 

Again,  the  Turkish  translation  of  John’s  Gospel,  chapter  fourteen  verse  thirty, 

says: 

I  shall  not  speak  with  you  for  much  longer,  for  the  ruler  of  the  world  is 
coming, and I am nothing compared with him. 

Thus, the title “Ruler of the World” means Glory of the World. And the title Glory of 
the  World  is  one  of  the  most famous of  Muhammad  the  Arabian’s  (Upon  whom be 
blessings and peace) titles.  

Again in John’s Gospel, chapter sixteen verse seven, it says:  

But  I  am  telling  you  the  truth.  My  departure  is  but  for  your  benefit.  For, 
unless I depart, the Comforter will not come. 

Now  see,  who  other  than  Muhammad  the  Arabian  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and 
peace)  is  the  Ruler  of  the  World  and  true  consoler  of  men?  Yes,  the  Glory  of  the 
World is  he, and he  is the one who will  save transitory man  from eternal extinction 
and thus comforts him. 

Again, the eighth verse of chapter sixteen in John’s Gospel: 

When  he  comes,  he  will  give  the  world  convincing  evidence  concerning  its 
sin, its righteousness, and its judgement.340 

Who  other  than  Muhammad  the  Arabian  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  has 
turned  the  world’s  wrongdoing  into  righteousness,  saved  men  from  sin  and 
associating partners with God, and transformed politics and world rule? 
Also from the Gospel of John, the eleventh verse of chapter sixteen: 

There is deliverance from judgement, for the Ruler of this World has already 
been judged.341 

Here  “the  Ruler  of  the  World”  is  certainly  Ahmad  Muhammad  (UWBP),  for  he  is 
known as the Master of Humanity.342 

Also, in John’s Gospel, the thirteenth verse of chapter twelve:343 

                                                 
340 Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 95-7; al-Anwar al-Muhammadiyya. 
341 Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 95-7; al-Anwar al-Muhammadiyya. 
342 Yes, he is such a lord and ruler that in most centuries for one thousand three hundred and fifty years 
he has had at least three hundred and fifty million followers and subjects, who have obeyed his 
commands in complete submission, and every day renew their allegiance to him by calling down God’s 
blessings on him.(Author) 
343 16:13. (Tr.) 

 

207

But when he, the Spirit of Truth, comes, he will guide you all to the truth, for 
he will not be presenting his own ideas, but will be passing onto you what he 
has heard. He will tell you about the future.344 

This verse is explicit. Who apart from Muhammad the Arabian (UWBP) has called all 
men to the truth, whose every statement was based on revelation, has spoken what he 
had heard from Gabriel, and informed man in detail about the resurrection of the dead 
and the hereafter? Who other than he could do this? 

Also,  the  Books  of  other  prophets  include  names  in  Syriac  and  Hebrew  that 
correspond  to  the  various  names  of  the  Noble  Messenger  (UWBP),  such  as 
Muhammad, Ahmad, Mukhtar. For example, in the scriptures of the Prophet Shu‘ayb, 
his name is “Mushaffah,”345 and means Muhammad. In the Torah, he is mentioned as 
“Munhamanna,” which again means Muhammad, and as “Himyata,”346 which means 
the  Prophet  of  al-Haram.  In  the  Psalms,  he  is  called  “al-Mukhtar.”347  Again  in  the 
Torah, the name is “al-Hatam al-Khatam.”348 Both in the Torah and in the Psalms, it 
is  “Muqim  al-Sunna,”349  in  the  scriptures  of  Abraham  and  in  the  Torah,  he  is 
mentioned as “Mazmaz,”350 and again in the Torah, as “Ahyad.”  

God’s Most Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) himself said: 
“In  the  Qur’an,  my  name  is  Muhammad,  in  the  Bible,  Ahmad,  and  in  the  Torah, 
Ahyad.”351  In  fact,  the  Bible  refers  to  him  as  “The  one  with  the  sword  and  the 
staff.”352 Indeed, the greatest of the prophets who wielded the sword, and was charged 
with  fighting  in  God’s  way  together  with  his  community,  was  God’s  Messenger 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace). The Gospels also describe him as “wearing a 
crown.”353 Yes, this  

                                                 
344 Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 346; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 743 
345 Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 353; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 112; Qastalani, 
Mawahib al-Ladunniya, vi, 189. 
346 Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 346, 354; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 112-3. 
347 Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 353; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 112; Qastalani, al-
Mawahib al-Ladunniya, vi, 189; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 739. 
348 Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 114. 
349 Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 115. 
350 Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 113; Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 353. 
351 Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 108, 112; Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 353; al-
Anwar al-Muhammadiya min al-Mawahib al-Ladunniya, 143, narrated from Ibn ‘Abbas. 
352 Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 114; Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 346-7; ‘Ali al-
Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 739. 
353 Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 113, 114; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 739. 

 

208

title  is  particular  to  God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace),  for 
“crown” means turban, for in former days, it was the Arabs who as a people, all wore 
the  turban  and  headband.  This  definitely  therefore  refers  to  God’s  Messenger 
(UWBP). 

The  term  “Paraclete”  in  the  Gospel,  or  “Faraqlit,”  is  defined  in  Biblical 
interpretation  as  “the  one  who  distinguishes  truth from falsehood.”354  It  is  therefore 
the name of one who in the future will lead people to the truth. 

In one place  in the Gospels, Jesus (Upon whom be peace) says: “I am  going so 
that  the  Lord  of  the  World  may  come.”355  Who  other  than  the  Noble  Messenger 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) has come after Jesus who will be the Ruler of 
the World, distinguish and separate truth from falsehood, and guide mankind in place 
of  Jesus?  That  is  to  say,  Jesus  (Upon  whom  be  peace)  was  constantly  giving  his 
community the good news: Another will come; no need will remain for me. I am his 
forerunner and herald. Confirming this is the following verse of the Qur’an: 

And remember, Jesus, the son of Mary, said: “O Children of Israel! I am the 
Messenger of God unto you, confirming that which was revealed before me 
in the Torah and bringing the good tidings of a Messenger to come after me, 
whose name is Ahmad [the Praised One].”(61:6) 

Yes, in the Gospels, Jesus gave the glad tidings many times, that the greatest leader of 
mankind would come. He is mentioned with various names, in, of course, Syriac and 
Hebrew  –  and  has  been  seen  by  scholars  –  which  bear  the  meaning  of  Ahmad, 
Muhammad, and the Distinguisher between Truth and Falsehood.356 That is to say, on 
many  occasions  Jesus  (Upon  whom  be  peace)  told  of  the  coming  of  Ahmad  (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace).357 

Q u e s t i o n :  Why  is  it that while the other prophets foretell the coming of 
Muhammad (UWBP), Jesus (UWP) does so more fully and in the form of good news? 
T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  Because  Ahmad  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace) 

defended Jesus (Upon whom be peace) against  

                                                 
354 Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 112. 
355 Halabi, Sira, i, 214; John, 16:7. 
356 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 234-5; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 496-7; Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-
‘Alamin, 112-5; Halabi, Sira, i, 214. 
357 At the site of the tomb of Sham’un al-Safa, the famous traveller Evliya Chelebi came across the 
following verses from the Gospels, written on gazelle hide: “A youth from the progeny of Abraham is 
to be a prophet. He will not be a liar; his birthplace will be Mecca; he will come with piety; his blessed 
name is Ahmad Muhammad;• those who obey him will prosper in this world and the next.” (Author) 
•The word, written as Mawamit, was corrupted from Mamad, itself a corruption of Muhammad. 

 

209

the fearsome denials and slander of the Jews, and saved his religion from corruption. 
Furthermore, in the face of the burdensome Shari‘a of the Children of Israel, who did 
not  recognize  Jesus,  he  came  with  an  elevated  Shari‘a  which  was  easy,  all-
encompassing,  and  completed  the  deficiencies  of  Jesus’  Shari‘a.  For  these  reasons, 
Jesus often gave the good news: the Ruler of the World will come!358 

Now  it  is clear  that  in  the  Torah,  the  Gospels, the  Psalms  of  David,  and  in the 
scriptures  of  other  prophets,  there  are  numerous  discussions  of  a  prophet  who  is  to 
come at a later time, many verses mentioning him. Just as we pointed out examples of 
these, showing that he is mentioned in these Books under various names. Who, other 
than  Muhammad  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace),  the  Prophet  of  the  end  of 
time, could it be that these  scriptures of the prophets speak of  so repeatedly  in their 
verses, and with such importance? 

The Second Kind 

The  signs  of  prophethood  that  were  manifested  by  way  of  irhasat  also  include 
those tidings of  his  coming  given before his prophetic mission in that time between 
prophets  by  the  soothsayers  and  certain  people  known  as  saints  and gnostics  at  that 
time; they published their claims and passed them down to subsequent generations in 
their poetry. These are numerous, and we shall mention some that are well-known and 
have been accepted and narrated by the scholars of history and the Prophet’s life.  

First:  One  of  the  rulers  of  Yemen,  called  Tubba‘,  saw  descriptions  of  God’s 
Messenger (UWBP) in former scriptures, and believed in him. He announced this by 
means of a poem, which went like this:  

I  bear  witness  to  Ahmad,  for  he  is  a  Messenger  from  God,  the  Creator  of 

Were I to live long enough to see him, I would be a minister and a cousin of 

man;  

his.359 

That is, I would have been like ‘Ali. 

Second: Quss b. Sa‘ida was the most renowned and most significant orator of the 
Arabs,  a  monotheist,  and  man  of  enlightened  mind.  Before  Muhammad’s  (UWBP) 
prophetic mission, he announced his messengership with these lines:  

                                                 
358 Qur’an, 61:1. See also, Halabi, Sira, i, 214; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 743; Nabhani, Hujjat 
Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 99, 114; John, 14:16, 17, 26, 30; 15:26; 16:7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14. 
359 Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, ii, 166; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 363; ^Alê al-Qari, Sharh al-
Shifa’, i, 740; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 388; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 138. 

 

210

Ahmad shall be sent forth amongst us, the best prophet ever sent; 
God’s  blessings  be  upon  him,  whenever  a  riding  party  sets  out  amidst 
cries!360 

Third:  Ka‘b  b.  Lu’ayy,  one  of  the  forefathers  of  the  Noble  Messsenger  (Upon 
whom  be  blessings  and  peace),  announced  Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  prophethood  by 
way of inspiration as follows:  

Suddenly, Muhammad the Prophet will appear,  
Giving tidings most true.361 

Fourth:  Sayf  b.  Dhi-Yazan,  one  of  the  rulers  of  Yemen,  read  descriptions  of 
God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  in  the  old  scriptures,  and 
believing  in  him,  longed  to  see  him.  When  ‘Abd  al-Muttalib,  Muhammad’s 
grandfather,  went  to  Yemen  with  some  of  the  Quraysh,  Sayf  summoned  them  and 
said: “A child will be born in Hijaz, with a mark between his shoulders resembling a 
seal. He will be the leader of all humanity.” Then, in private he told ‘Abd al-Muttalib: 
“You are his grandfather,”362 foretelling his mission in a wondrous way. 

Fifth:  Waraqa  b.  Nawfal  was  a  cousin  of  Khadija.  When  the  first  revelation 
came, the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) was deeply shaken. 
Khadija  described  the  event  to  the  well-known  Waraqa  b.  Nawfal,  who  told  her  to 
send  him  to  him.  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP)  went  to  Waraqa  and  told  him  how the 
revelation had come. Waraqa said: “Good news, O Muhammad! I testify that you are 
the awaited prophet who was foretold by Jesus.”363 That is, Don’t worry! It was truly 
the coming of revelation. 

Sixth: Before the prophetic mission, a gnostic called Athkalan al-Himyari asked 
the  Quraysh  when  he  saw  them:  “Is  there  anyone  among  you  who  claims 
prophethood?” They replied in the  negative.  He again asked them  at the  start of  his 
mission,  and  this  time  their  reply  was  affirmative.  Athkalan  said:  “The  world  is 
awaiting him!”364 

                                                 
360 Suyuti, al-Fath al-Kabir, ii, 133; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, ii, 230; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 
363; Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 740; Tabarani, al-Majmu’ al-Kabir, xii, 1254; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-
Nubuwwa, ii, 101; Abu Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 105. 
361 Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, ii, 244; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 364; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, 
i, 740; Abu Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 89-90. 
362 Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, ii, 328; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 343; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, 
i, 740; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 388; Abu Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 95-6; Halabi, al-Sirat al-
Halabiya, i, 187. 
363 Bukhari, Bad’ al-Wahy, 3; Anbiya’, 21; Ta’bir, 1; Musnad (Tahqiq: Ahmad Shakir), iv, 304, no: 
2846; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 363; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 743; ‘Ajurri, al-Shari’a, 443; Abu 
Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 217. 
364 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 363; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 742; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-
‘Alamin, 140. 

 

211

Seventh:  Ibn  al-‘Ala,  a  famous  Christian  scholar,  told  of  God’s  Messenger 
(UWBP)  before  his  mission,  never  having  seen  him.  He  later  came,  saw  the 
Messenger  (UWBP),  and  said:  “By  the  One  who  sent  you  in  truth,  I  found  your 
description in the Gospels, and the Son of Mary gave glad tidings of your coming.”365 
Eighth:  Mentioned  above  was  the  Negus  of  Abyssinia,  who  declared:  “Would 
that I had been the servant of Muhammad the Arabian (Upon whom be blessings and 
peace),  rather  than  a  king.  To  serve  him  would  have  been  far  superior  to  this 
sovereignty.”366 

In addition to these tidings given by these learned men through divine inspiration 
from the Unseen, soothsayers too gave news from the Unseen of the coming of God’s 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace), and of his prophethood, by means 
of jinn and spirit beings. These are numerous also, and we shall mention a few which 
are well-known, have reached the degree of ‘consensus in meaning,’ and are related in 
most  of  the  books  of  history  and  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  biography.  Referring  the 
lengthy accounts of them to those books, we shall give only a summary of them. 

The First is the famous soothsayer, Shiqq, who had only one eye, one arm, and 
one  leg;  he  was  quite  simply  half  a  man.  His  repeated  predictions  concerning 
Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  messengership  have  passed  into  the  history  books,  with  the 
certainty of consensus in meaning.367 

The  Second  is  the  famous  soothsayer  of  Damascus,  Satêh,  who  was  a 
monstrosity lacking bones, and even limbs, whose face was in his chest and who lived 
a  very  long  time.  He  was  highly  reputed  at  that  time  for  the  correct  information  he 
gave concerning the Unseen. The Persian king, Chosroes, even, sent a learned envoy 
called  Mubezan  to  ask  Satih  to  interpret  a  strange  dream  he  had  at  the  time  of 
Muhammad’s (UWBP) birth, in which the fourteen pinnacles of his palace collapsed. 
Satih  said:  “Fourteen  men  will  rule  over  you,  then  your  empire  will  be  destroyed. 
Also  someone  will  come  who  will  announce  a  religion;  he  will  abolish  both  your 
religion and your empire,” sending news of this to Chosroes. In this way, Satih expli 

                                                 
365 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 744; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 121, 208. 
366 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 365; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 115; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-
Nubuwwa, ii, 285. 
367 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 364; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 747; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-
‘Alamin, 168-72; Abu Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 123, 125. 

 

212

citly foretold the coming of the Prophet of the end of time.368 

As  written  in  detail  in  the  books  of  history  and  the  Prophet’s  biography, 
soothsayers  like  Sawad  b.  Qarib  al-Dawsi,  Khunafir,  Af‘a  Najran,  Jidhl  b.  Jidhl  al-
Kindi,  Ibn  Khalasat  al-Dawsi,  and  Fatima  bint  al-Nu‘man  al-Najariyya,  foretold the 
coming of the Prophet of the end of time,  stating that that Prophet was Muhammad 
(UWBP).369 

Also,  one  of  ‘Uthman’s  relations,  Sa‘d  b.  bint  al-Kurayz,  received  knowledge 
from  the  Unseen  by  means  of  soothsaying  about  the  prophethood  of  Muhammad 
(Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace).  In  the  early  days  of  Islam,  he  told  ‘Uthman 
Dhi’l-Nurayn to go and accept faith. ‘Uthman did so and entered the fold of Islam at 
the beginning. Sa‘d expressed the event with a poem, which went like this: 

Through my words, God has guided ‘Uthman to the source 
That yields righteousness; truly God guides to the truth.370 

Like soothsayers,  jinns who were  invisible but whose  voices were  heard, called 
hatif,  repeatedly  foretold  the  coming  of  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings and peace). For example: 

An  invisible  jinn shouted out the following to Dhayab b. al-Harith, and was the 
reason that he and others accepted Islam: “O Dhayab! O Dhayab! Listen to the oddest 
thing: Muhammad has appeared with the Book. He  is calling on Mecca,  yet they do 
not respond to him!”371 

Another  unseen  jinn  called  out  to  Sama‘ b.  Qarrat  al-Ghatafani,  “The  truth  has 
come in manifest radiance, the false is destroyed and uprooted,” and caused him and 
some others to believe.372 

Such messages and good tidings given by unseen jinns are extremely well-known 

and numerous. 

Just  as  the  voices  of  jinns  and  the  soothsayers  foretold  him,  so  too  idols  and 
sacrifices slaughtered for the idols gave news of the prophethood of God’s Messenger 
(UWBP). For example: 

One is the famous story of the idol of the Mazan tribe, who shouted out:  

                                                 
368 Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, ii, 355-69; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 126, 129; Abu 
Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 125; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 365; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 747; 
Suyuti, al-Khasa’is al-Kubra, i, 128-30. 
369 Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, ii, 335; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 248; Abu Nu’aym, 
Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 125; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 365; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 747; Suyuti, 
al-Khasa’is al-Kubra, i, 128-30; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 248-9, 251. 
370 Suyuti, al-Khasa’is al-Kubra\, i, 258. 
371 Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 335-7; Suyuti, al-Khasa’is al-Kubra, i, 358; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat 
Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 181. 
372 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 748; Suyuti, al-Khasa’is al-Kubra, i, 252. 

 

213

“This is the Prophet who has been sent; he comes with the revealed truth,”373 telling 
of Muhammad’s (UWBP) messengership. 

Another  is  the  well-known  incident  which  caused  ‘Abbas  b.  Mardas  to  accept 
Islam:  there  was  an  idol  called  Dimar,  which  one  day  called  out:  “Dimar  was 
worshipped  before  the  declaration  of  Muhammad;  that  misguidance  can  no  longer 
continue.”374 

Before he accepted Islam, ‘Umar  heard an animal sacrificed to an idol exclaim: 
“O  sacrificer,  the  means  of  success  are  at  hand:  an  eloquent  man  proclaiming,  ‘No 
god but God!’”375 

There  are  very  many  more  examples  like  these,  which  have  been  accepted  as 

authentic and narrated in reliable books. 

And  just  as  soothsayers,  gnostics,  invisible  jinns,  and  even  idols  and  sacrifices 
told  of  Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  messengership,  and  each  instance  was  the  cause  of 
people coming to believe in him, so too inscriptions on stones over and in graves, and 
on gravestones, like “Muhammad, a worker of righteousness, the trustworthy,” were 
the  means  of  some  people  coming  to  believe.376  Because,  in  the  time  shortly  before 
Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings and peace) lived, there were only seven men 
bearing  that  name,  and  not  one  of  them  deserved  the  epithet  of  righteous  and 
trustworthy.377 

The Third Kind 

These are irhasat including the wondrous events  which occurred at the time of, 
and  in  conjunction  with,  the  birth  of  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace).  There  were  also  events  that  occurred  before  his  prophetic 
mission which were miracles. They were many and we shall mention a few examples 
that  became  famous,  have  been  accepted  by  the  authorities  on  Hadiths,  and  whose 
authenticity have been established. 

The First: On the night of the Prophet’s (UWBP) birth, both his mother, and the 

mothers of ‘Uthman b. al-‘As and ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Awf, who  

                                                 
373 Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 255; Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 325; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya 
wa’l-Nihaya, ii, 337; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 242; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 747; 
Suyuti, al-Khasa’is al-Kubra, i, 252-71. 
374 al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 246; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, ii, 341-2; Bayhaqi, 
Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 118; al-Shifa’ (Tahqiq: M. Emin Kara Ali  et al.), i, 598. 
375 Bukhari, Manaqib al-Ansar, 35; al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-Rabbani, xx, 2030. 
376 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’ i, 467; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’ i, 749; Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya i, 354. 
377 Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya i, 131-4. 

 

214

were with her, saw a brilliant, widely scattered light, about which they said: “At the 
time of his birth we saw a light so bright it lit up the east and the west for us.”378 

The Second: That night most of the  idols in the  Ka‘ba toppled over and fell to 

the ground.379 

The Third: That night the famous aywan of Chosroes’ palace shook and cracked 

apart, and its fourteen pinnacles collapsed.380 

The  Fourth:  That  night  the  small  lake  of  Saveh,  which  was  considered  to  be 
holy, sank into the ground,381 and at Istakhrabad the fire which, burning continuously 
for a thousand years, the Zoroastrians had worshipped, was extinguished.382 

These four events indicated that the person who had just been born would abolish 
fire-worship, destroy the palace of the Persian  kings, and prevent those things being 
sanctified that God did not permit. 

The  Fifth:  Although  they  did  not  coincide  with  the  night  of  Muhammad’s 
(UWBP) birth, certain events that took place not long before it are also included in the 
irhasat. One is the War of the Elephant, which is mentioned in the Qur’an in Sura al-
Fil. Abraha, the king of Abyssinia, came to destroy the Ka‘ba, driving a huge elephant 
called Mahmudi before his forces. When they came close to Mecca, the elephant was 
unable  to  move.  They  could  not  make  it  move  forward,  and  had  to  retreat.  While 
retreating, a flock of birds attacked and routed them, and they fled. This extraordinary 
story  is  recorded  in  detail  in  the  history  books.  The  event  was  one of  the  proofs  of 
Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  prophethood,  for  it  occurred  close  in  time  to  his  birth  and 
saved  the  Holy  Ka‘ba,  his  qibla,  birthplace,  and  native  land,  from  Abraha’s 
destruction.383 

The  Sixth:  According  to  the  testimony  of  Halima  al-Sa‘diya  and  her  husband, 
when  God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be blessings  and peace)  was  with  them  in  his 
childhood, they frequently saw a cloud above him shield 

                                                 
378 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’ i, 466; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’ i, 750; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’ iii, 311; 
al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-Rabbani xx, 2030. 
379 Suyuti, al-Khasa’is al-Kubra i, 119-31; ii, 272; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa i, 19. 
380 ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’ i, 750; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa i, 126;  Suyuti, al-Khasa’is al-
Kubra i, 128; ii, 272. 
381 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’ i, 366; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’ i, 751; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa i, 
127; Suyuti, al-Khasa’is al-Kubra i, 128. 
382 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’ i, 367; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’ i, 751; ‘Ali al-Qari al-Makki, al-Masnu’ fi 
Ma’rifat al-Hadith al-Mawdu’ al-Mawdu’at al-Sughra’ (Tahqiq: Abu Ghudda), 18. 
383 Ibn Hisham, al-Sirat al-Nabawiyya, i, 44-54; Ibn Sa’d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, i, 90-2; Abu Nu’aym, 
Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 144-51; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, ii, 157-60. 

 

215

ing  him  from  the  sun.  They  told  everyone  this,  and  it  was  well-known  and 
authenticated.384 

Also,  as  testified  to  by  the  monk  Bahira,  when  the  Noble  Messenger  (UWBP) 
went  to  Damascus  at  the  age  of  twelve,  he  saw  a  cloud  casting  a  shadow  over  his 
head, and he pointed this out.385 

Again before his prophetic mission, one time God’s Messenger (UWBP) returned 
from  a  trading  journey  he  made  together  with  Khadija’s  servant,  Maysara,  when 
Khadija  saw  two  angels  shading  him  like  clouds. She  mentioned  this  to  her servant 
Maysara, and he replied: “I observed the same thing throughout our journey.”386 

The  Seventh:  It  is  established  in  a  sound  narration  that  before  his  prophetic 
mission,  God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  sat  down  under  a 
tree.  Although  the  place  was  dried  up,  it  suddenly  grew  green.  The  tree’s  branches 
inclined over his head, twisting back and shading him.387 

The Eighth: When the Noble Messenger (Upon  whom be blessings  and peace) 
was small, he stayed in Abu Talib’s house. Whenever he ate together with Abu Talib 
and his household, they would eat to repletion; whereas when he was not present, they 
were not satisfied.388 This is both well-known and definite.389 

Also,  Umm  Ayman,  who  looked  after  and  served  the  Noble  Messenger  (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace) when he was small, said: “God’s Messenger (UWBP) 
never complained about being hungry or thirsty, neither when small nor when he was 
older.”390 

The Ninth: It is both well-known and definite that unlike other members of her 

tribe, his wet-nurse Halima al-Sa‘diya’s goats and posses 

                                                 
384 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 368; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 318; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 753. 
385 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 308; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 631; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 3 (Bab: Maja’ 
fi Badi’ al-Nubuwwa); al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi, no: 3699; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 615; 
Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabi, 115. 
386 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 368; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 318; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 753; 
Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 65. 
387 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 368; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 318; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 753. 
388 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 367; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 315; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 751; 
Abu Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 166. 
389 Ibn Sa’d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, i, 119-20; Abu Nu^aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 166; Suyuti, al-
Khasa’is al-Kubra, i, 205. 
390 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 368; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 325; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 752; 
Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, vi, 125. 

 

216

sions were very productive and abundant.391 

Also,  flies  did  not  bother  him;  they  never  alighted  on  his  clothes  or  blessed 
body392  –  just  as  one  of  his  progeny,  Sayyid  ‘Abd  al-Qadir  Gilani,  received  this 
legacy from his forefather, for flies never alighted on him either.393 

The Tenth: After God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) 
was born, and especially on the night of his birth, there was a great increase in falling 
stars.394 As shown with decisive proofs in the Fifteenth Word, falling stars are a sign 
of  jinns  and  devils  being  barred  from  receiving  news  of  the  Unseen.  Thus,  since 
God’s  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  had  appeared  in  the  world 
together with revelation, it was necessary to prevent the knowledge about the Unseen 
being transmitted by soothsayers, diviners, and jinn, which was inaccurate and mixed 
with  lies, so that their  knowledge should not cause any doubts about revelation, and 
should  not  resemble  it.  Before  the  prophetic  mission,  soothsaying  was  widespread. 
Then  with  its  revelation,  the  Qur’an  brought  it  to an  end. Indeed, many  soothsayers 
accepted Islam, for they could no longer find their informers, who were jinns. That is, 
the  Qur’an  had  put  an  end  to  it.  And  these  days  a  new  type  of  soothsaying  has 
appeared in the form of mediums among the spiritualists of the West. But we shall not 
go into that now. 

I n  S h o r t : Very many events occurred and persons appeared confirming and 
causing others to confirm the prophethood of the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be 
blessings  and  peace)  before  the  commencement  of  his mission.  For  sure, before  the 
appearance of the one who was going to be the ruler of the world395 and would change 
the  world’s  spiritual  shape,  and  would  make this  world  into  the  tillage  for  the  next, 
and proclaim the  

                                                 
391 al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-Rabbani, xx, 192-3; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 220-1; Abu 
Nu^aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 111-3; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, ii, 273; Qadi Iyad, al-
Shifa’, i, 366; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 750; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 313. 
392 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 368; al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, iii, 319; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 753; 
Sha’rani, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, i, 109. 
393 Nabhani, Jami’ Karamat al-Awliya’, ii, 203. 
394 al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 220; Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 111; Qadi Iyad, al-
Shifa’, i, 366; Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 207-8. 
395 Yes, the Sultan of Lawlak* was such a leader that his rule has been continuing for one thousand 
three hundred and fifty years. Every century after the first, he has had at least 350 million followers and 
subjects. With half the globe under his banner, every day his followers renew their allegiance to him in 
perfect submission by calling down on him peace and blessings, and obey his commands. 
•’Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 6. [See also, fn. 298]. 

 

217

high value of the creatures of the world, and show to man and jinn the way to eternal 
happiness and save them from everlasting extinction, and solve the obscure talisman 
of  the  world  and  riddle  of  the  wisdom  in  its  creation,  and  would  know  and  make 
known the purposes of the universe’s Creator, and recognize the Creator and acquaint 
Him  to  all  men  –  before  such  a  one  appeared,  surely  everything,  all  species  and 
realms of beings would be happy at  his coming,  would await him and welcome and 
applaud  him,  and  if  his  coming  was  made  known  to  them  by  their  Creator,  they  in 
turn would announce it. Indeed, we saw in the above Signs and examples how each 
realm  of  creature  displayed  his  miracles  as  if    welcoming  him,  and  confirmed  his 
prophethood through the tongue of miracles. 

SEVENTEENTH SIGN 

After the Qur’an, the greatest miracle of God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be 
blessings  and  peace)  was  his  own  self.  That  is,  the  elevated  moral  virtues  brought 
together in his person, which as friend and foe agreed was in all respects of the very 
highest degree. A hero of the greatest bravery, ‘Ali, said again and again: “Whenever 
the fighting grew fierce, we would take refuge behind God’s Messenger (Upon whom 
be blessings and peace).”396 Like this, his was the highest and unattainable degree of 
all praiseworthy qualities. For this  greatest miracle, we refer readers to the al-Shifa’ 
al-Sharif  of  Qadi  Iyad,  the  learned  scholar  of  the  Maghrib,  for  he  described  and 
proved beautifully this miracle of praiseworthy moral qualities. 

A further great miracle of Muhammad (UWBP) which  is  verified by  friend and 
foe  alike  is  his  illustrious  Shari‘a,  the  like  of  which  neither  came  before  it  nor will 
come after it. For a partial explanation of it, we refer readers to the thirty-three Words, 
thirty-three Letters, thirty-one Flashes, and thirteen Rays which we have written. 

Among  his  greatest  miracles,  a  certain  one,  the  many  reports  of  which  are 
unanimous, is the Splitting of the Moon. This miracle is related through many chains 
of transmission from many of the leading Companions like Ibn Mas‘ud, Ibn ‘Abbas, 
Ibn ‘Umar, ‘Ali, Anas, and Hudhayfa. In addition, the Qur’an announced this supreme 
miracle to the whole world with the verse: 

The Hour is nigh, and the moon split.(54:1) 

The obdurate idolators of the Quraysh at that time could not deny what this  

                                                 
396 Musnad, i, 86; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 143; Kanz al-‘Ummal, xii, 419. 

 

218

verse  states;  they  could  only  declare  that  it  was  “magic.”397  That  is  to  say,  the 
unbelievers  also  confirmed  the  splitting  of  the  moon  as  certain.  For  this  supreme 
miracle, we refer readers to the Addendum of the Thirty-First Word. 

Furthermore, just as the Noble Messenger (UWBP) showed the inhabitants of the 
earth the miracle of the Splitting of the Moon, so too he showed the inhabitants of the 
heavens his supreme miracle of the Ascension. Referring that greatest miracle to the 
Treatise  on the Ascension,  the  Thirty-First  Word,  which  demonstrates  with  decisive 
proofs – even to deniers – how luminous, exalted, and true a miracle it was, we shall 
mention here only his journey to Jerusalem, the preliminary part of the miracle of the 
Ascension.  For  it  was  a  miracle  too  that  when  asked  by  the  Quraysh  the  following 
morning,  he  provided  them  with  a  description  of  the  Masjid  al-Aqsa.  It  was  as 
follows: 

The morning after the night of the Ascension, he informed the Quraysh about the 
Ascension. They dismissed it as false, and said: “If you really went to the Masjid al-
Aqsa  in  Jerusalem,  then  describe  to  us  its  doors,  walls,  and  condition.”  The  Noble 
Messenger (UWBP) later said: “I was annoyed by their question and denial in a way 
that I had never been annoyed before. Suddenly, God Almighty lifted the veil between 
me and the Masjid al-Aqsa and showed it to me; I looked at it, and saw and described 
it.”398  Then  the  Quraysh  understood  that  he  was  giving  the  correct  and  complete 
description. 

God’s Noble Messenger (UWBP) also told them: “During the journey, I saw one 
of your caravans. It will arrive here tomorrow at such-and-such a time.” They waited 
for the caravan. It was delayed for an hour, so in order that the Messenger’s (UWBP) 
prediction should be right, the sun was arrested for an hour, as is confirmed by those 
who investigated the event. That is to say, in order to prove what  he  said was right, 
the earth stopped its journeying, its duty, for an hour, and its immobility was shown 
as the sun being arrested in its motion.399 

Thus, the mighty earth abandoned its duty in order to confirm a single statement 
of  Muhammad  the  Arabian  (UWBP),  and  the  mighty  sun  witnessed  it.  So  you  may 
understand how unfortunate are those who do not  

                                                 
397 Tirmidhi, Tafsir al-Qur’an, 54:5; Musnad, iv, 82. 
398 Bukhari, Manaqib al-Ansar, 41; Tafsir Sura, 17:3; Muslim, Iman, 276, 278; Tafsir Sura, 17:3; 
Musnad, i, 309; iii, 377; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 191. 
399 Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa’, i, 284; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 591-2; Suyuti, al-Durar al-Muntathira, 
193; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, viii, 296; al-Sa’ati, al-Fath al-Rabbani, vi, 155; al-Albani, 
Silsilat al-Ahadith al-Da’ifa, 972. 

 

219

affirm him nor obey his commands, and how fortunate are those who affirm him and 
say: “We have heard and we obey!” Now offer praise and thanks to God for Islam and 
belief! 

EIGHTEENTH SIGN 

The  greatest  miracle  of God’s  Noble  Messenger (Upon  whom  be blessings  and 
peace),  an  eternal  one,  is  the  All-Wise  Qur’an,  which  comprises  hundreds  of 
evidences  of  his  prophethood, and  forty  aspects  of  whose  own  miraculousness  have 
been proven. The Twenty-Fifth Word has explained concisely and proved those forty 
aspects  in  its  approximately  one  hundred  and  fifty  pages.  Therefore,  referring  that 
supreme miracle, a treasury of miracles, to that Word, here we shall explain only one 
or two points. 

First Point 

I f  i t  i s  a s k e d : The miraculousness of the Qur’an lies in its eloquence. But 
all classes of men have the right to a share of its understanding, and only one learned 
scholar out of a thousand can understand the miraculousness in its eloquence? 

T h e  A n s w e r : The All-Wise Qur’an has a different kind of miraculousness 
corresponding  to  the  understanding  of  each  class;  it  indicates  the  existence  of  its 
miraculousness to each in a different way. For example, to the scholars of rhetoric and 
eloquence, it exhibits the miraculousness of its extraordinary eloquence. To the poets 
and  orators,  it  shows  its  exalted,  beautiful,  and  original  style,  which  no  one  can 
imitate although it pleases everyone. The passage of time does not cause its style to 
age;  it  always  remains  fresh  and  new.  Its  prose  and  word-order  are  so  well-ordered 
that it is both elevated and pleasant. To soothsayers and other diviners of the Unseen, 
it displays its miraculousness  in  its extraordinary  reports concerning the  Unseen. To 
historians,  it  demonstrates  its  miraculousness  by  giving  information  concerning 
events of past ages, as well as those of the future, and of the Intermediate Realm and 
the  hereafter.  To  social  and  political  scientists,  it  shows  the  miraculousness  in  its 
sacred  principles.  Yes,  the  Supreme  Shari‘a,  which  proceeds  from  the  Qur’an, 
indicates that mystery of miraculousness. To those occupied with knowledge of God 
and  cosmic  truths,  it  shows  the  miraculousness  of  the  sacred  divine  truths  in  the 
Qur’an,  or  else  it  indicates  the  existence  of  that  miraculousness.  To  the  Sufis  and 
saints,  it  shows  the  miraculousness  in  the  hidden  mysteries  of  its  verses,  which 
constantly  rise  and  fall  like  waves  in  the  sea  of  the  Qur’an.  And  so  on.  To  each  of 
forty  classes  of  men,  it  opens  up  a  window  and  shows  its  miraculousness.  The 
ordinary people even, who only listen to the  

 

220

Qur’an  understanding  a  little  of  its  meaning,  confirm  that  it  does  not  resemble  any 
other  book. They  say:  “The  Qur’an  is  either  inferior  to  all  the  other  books  we have 
heard read, which not even an enemy could claim – just as it is impossible – or it is 
superior  to  all  of  them  and  is  thus  a  miracle.”  Now,  in  order  to  help  him,  we  shall 
explain  further  the  miraculousness  which  the  ordinary  man  understood  by  just 
listening. It is as follows: 

When  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  appeared  challenging  the  whole 

world, it aroused passionate feelings of two kinds in people: 

The  First:  In  friends,  the  desire  to  imitate  it;  that  is,  the  desire  to resemble the 

style of their beloved Qur’an, and a wish to speak like it. 

The Second: In enemies, the desire to criticize and dispute it; that is, the wish to 

invalidate its claim of miraculousness by competing with its style. 

Thus, because of  these  two intense  emotions,  millions  of  books  were  written  in 
Arabic,  and  are  to  be  seen.  Now,  whoever  listens  to  the  most  eloquent,  the  most 
brilliant,  of  these  books  being  read  together  with  the  Qur’an  is  bound  to  say  that  it 
does not resemble any of them. That means that the Qur’an is not of the same level as 
them.  In  which  case,  it  must  either  be  inferior  to  all  of  them,  which  together  with 
being  impossible  a  hundred  times  over,  no one,  not even  Satan,  could claim,  or  the 
Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition is superior to all of them. 

Furthermore,  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  demonstrates  its  miraculousness  before  the 
uneducated  mass  of  people,  who  do  not  understand  its  meaning,  by  not  wearying 
them. Indeed, they say: “If I hear the finest and best known poems two or three times, 
I  become  bored  of  them.  But  the  Qur’an  never  wearies  me;  the  more  I  listen  to  it, 
even, the more it pleases me. It cannot therefore be written by man.”  

try 

to  memorize 

To  children  who 

its 
miraculousness  by  settling  in  their  memories  with  the  greatest  of  ease,  despite  their 
small, delicate, weak and simple heads being unable to retain for long a single page of 
other books, and many of the verses and phrases of that large Qur’an resembling one 
another, which should cause muddle and confusion. 

the  All-Wise  Qur’an  shows 

it, 

Even  to  the  sick  and  the  dying,  who  are  disturbed  by  the  slightest  sound  and 
noise, the murmuring sound of the Qur’an makes felt a sort of its miraculousness, by 
being as sweet and agreeable for them as Zamzam water. 

I  n    S  h  o  r  t  :  The  All-Wise  Qur’an  demonstrates  its  miraculousness  to  forty 
different  classes  and  groups  of  people,  or  it  indicates  the  existence  of  its 
miraculousness. It neglects no one. Even for those who can comprehend  

 

221

only what their eyes see and who have no ear to hear with, no heart to feel with, and 
no knowledge to judge with, the Qur’an alludes to its miraculousness in a fashion.400 
It is like this:  

In  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  handwritten  by  the  calligrapher  Hafiz 
Osman  and  later  printed,  many  of  the  words  look  to one  another.  For  example,  if  a 
needle  is  passed  through  the  word  “dog”  in  the  phrase  “they  were  seven,  the  dog 
being  the  eighth”  in  Sura  al-Kahf  (18:22)  and through  the  underlying  pages,  with  a 
slight  deviation  it  will  go  through  the  word  “Qitmir”  in  Sura  al-Fatir  (35:13),  thus 
establishing  the  dog’s  name.  In  a  similar  way,  the  words  “they  will  be  all  brought 
before  us”  (muhdarun-in)  occur  twice  in  Sura  Ya.  Sin.  (36:32,  53,  75),  the  first 
overlying  the  second.  The  same  words  are  again  repeated  twice  in  Sura  al-Saffat 
(37:57, 127), and these look both to each other and to those in Sura Ya. Sin. Also, the 
phrase  “in  pairs”  (mathnà)  occurs only  three  times  in  the  Qur’an,  and  two  of  these 
corresponding cannot be mere coincidence.401 There are numerous similar examples. 
One word even coincides with slight deviation on five or six underlying pages. I have 
seen a copy of the Qur’an in which passages looking to one another on facing pages 
were  written  in  red  ink.  At  that  time  I  said  that  that  too  indicated  another  sort  of 
miracle. Some time later I saw that many phrases looked to others on the reverse of 
pages,  corresponding  to  one  another  in  a  meaningful  way.  Thus,  since  the 
arrangement  of  the  Qur’an  in  the writing  and  script  of printed  copies  of  the  Qur’an 
also is through the guidance of the Prophet (UWBP) and divine inspiration, it is a sort 
of sign of its miraculousness. For it is neither the work of chance, nor of the human 
mind.  Sometimes  there  are  deviations,  but  that  is  generally  the  fault  of  the  printing 
and  if  it  had  been  absolutely  in  order,  the  words  would  have  corresponded  to  one 
another exactly. 

Furthermore,  on  every  page  of  the  Qur’an’s  Suras  of  long  and  medium  length 
which  were  revealed  in  Medina,  the  word  “Allah”  has  been  repeated  in  the  most 
wondrous manner. In addition to being repeated mostly five, six, seven, eight, nine or 
eleven times on the same page, the repetitions of  

                                                 
400 Here the mention of the aspect of its miraculousness directed to those without ear, heart and 
knowledge, and who see only with their eyes, is extremely concise, abbreviated, and even deficient. 
But it has been demonstrated most clearly and brilliantly in the Twenty-Ninth and Thirtieth Letters,• so 
that even the blind can see it. We have had a copy of the Qur’an written that shows this aspect of 
miraculousness. God willing, it will be published, then everyone will be able to see it. 
*The Thirtieth Letter had been planned and intended, but it gave up its place to Isharat al-I‘jaz (Signs 
of Miraculousness), while itself never materialized. (Author) 
401 The phrase occuring towards the end of Sura al-Saba’ (34:46) corresponds to the same phrase as the 
beginning of Sura al-Fatir (35:1). 

 

222

the  two  sides  of  the  same page  or  on  facing pages  display  beautiful  and  significant 
numerical relationships.402, 403, 404, 405 

Second Point 

At the time of Moses (Upon whom be peace), it was magic that was prevalent, so 
his most important miracles resembled it. And at Jesus (Upon whom be peace)’s time, 
it  was  medicine  that  was  prevalent  and  his  miracles  were  mostly  of  that  kind. 
Similarly,  at  the  time  of  the  Most  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and 
peace), in the Arabian Peninsula four things were prevalent:  

The First: Eloquence and rhetoric. 
The Second: Poetry and oratory. 

                                                 
402 Also, for those who practise the recitation of the divine names and praises and supplicate God, the 
Qur’an&s adorned and rhymed words, and eloquent and artistic style, and the many virtues of its 
eloquence, which draw attention to itself, afford an elevated seriousness and sense of the divine 
presence, and  a  collectedness of mind; they do not mar or spoil these. Whereas, rhetoric, artistic 
wording, rhyme and poetic composition of that sort usually weaken seriousness, make their elegance 
felt, disturb the sense of God’s presence, and distract attention. In fact, I used to recite Imam al-
Shafi’i’s famous supplication frequently, for it is a most subtle and serious supplication, is composed in 
an elevated versified form, and once caused the end of dearth and famine in Egypt. On reading it, I 
observed that it was in verse and rhymed, and that this spoilt its lofty seriousness. I recited it constantly 
for eight or nine years, and I was unable to reconcile the verse and rhyme with its serious nature. I 
understood from this that there is a sort of miraculousness in the rhyming and ordering and qualities of 
the Qur’an’s words, which are particular and natural and original to it, that preserves completely the 
seriousness and sense of the divine presence, not spoiling them. Thus, even if those who recite 
supplications and the divine names and praises do not understand this sort of miraculousness with the 
mind, they perceive it with the heart. 
403 Another aspect of the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition’s miraculousness is that it expresses the 
most elevated and brilliant degree of the Noble Messenger’s (UWBP) belief, who manifested the 
Greatest Name. It also expresses and instructs in a natural manner the religion of truth, which, being 
most vast, extensive, and lofty, sets forth the lofty truths of the worlds of the hereafter and of 
dominicality like a sacred map. It conveys too in all its infinite glory and majesty, the address of the 
Creator of the universe, in respect of His being the Sustainer of all beings. Certainly, in the face of its 
exposition being thus, if, in accordance with the verse, 

“Say: If the whole of mankind and the jinn were to gather together to pro- 
duce the like of this Qur’an, they could not produce its like,”(17:88)  

all the minds of mankind were to unite and become a single mind, they could not contest it or oppose it. 
How could they? They are as distant from the Qur’an as the earth is from the Pleiades. For in view of 
the three above principles, it is certainly not possible to imitate the Qur’an, nor to compose its like. 
404 At the bottom of every page of the Qur’an, the verses are complete and they end rhyming in a fine 
way. The reason is this: when the verse called Mudayana (2:292) provides the standard for the pages, 
and the Suras Ikhlas and Kawthar, the standard for the lines, this fine quality of the All-Wise Qur’an 
and sign of its miraculousness become apparent. 
405 Because of unfortunate haste, we had to content ourselves in this section with some slight 
indications and brief instances and small signs of a highly important and magnificent wonder, one 
which from the point of view of the Risale-i Nur’s success is beautiful, illuminating, and encouraging. 
Now, that important truth and encouraging wonder – under the name of ‘coincidence’ (tevâfuk), and 
five or six sorts at that – forms a chain of wonders of the Risale-i Nur, and flashes of a visible sort of 
the Qur’an’s miraculousness, and a source of signs of the ciphers of the Unseen. Later, we had a copy 
of the Qur’an written that showed in gilded letters a flash of its miraculousness which appeared from 
the coinciding of the word Alla\h. And I wrote eight short pieces, called The Eight Symbols (Rumûzat-ı 
Semaniye), which explain the subtle relationships evident in the coinciding of the Qur’an’s letters, and 
their allusions concerning the Unseen. I also wrote five treatises, one about the wonders of Ghauth al-
Gilani, three about those of ‘Ali, and one called Indications of the Qur’an (İşârât-ı Kur’aniye), which 
by means of tevâfuk or coincidences, confirm, commend, and applaud the Risale-i Nur. That is to say, 
that important truth was perceived and written in summary fashion in the writing of The Miracles of 
Muhammad, but unfortunately the author saw and described only a tiny part of it; he continued without 
further pursuing it. 

 

223

The Third: Soothsaying and divining matters of the Unseen. 
The Fourth: Knowledge of past events and cosmology. 
Thus,  when  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  appeared,  it  challenged  those 

with knowledge of these four fields. 

to it in astonishment.  

Firstly, it made the men of rhetoric and eloquence bow before it; they all listened 

Secondly, it filled the poets and orators with amazement, that is, those who spoke 
well  and  declaimed  fine  poetry,  so  that  they  bit  their  fingers  in  astonishment.  It 
nullified the value of their finest poems inscribed in gold, causing them to remove the 
famous Seven Hanging Poems, their pride and glory, from the walls of the Ka‘ba. 

It  silenced  the  soothsayers  and  sorcerers,  who  gave  news  of  the  Unseen,  and 
made them forget the knowledge they had received. It drove away the jinns, and put 
an end to soothsaying. 

It saved those with  knowledge of the past and cosmology  from superstition and 

falsehood, and instructed them in true facts and luminous knowledge. 

Thus,  these  four  groups  bowed  before  the  Qur’an  in  perfect  wonder  and 

veneration, becoming its students. At no time could any of them attempt to contest it. 
I f  i t  i s  a s k e d :  How do we know that no one could dispute or contest it? 
T h e  A n s w e r : If it had been possible to dispute it, for sure someone would 
have attempted it. For their religion, their possessions, their  lives, and their families 
had been put into peril. If they had disputed it, they would have been saved. If it had 
been possible, they were bound to contest it. And if they had done so, since those who 
wished to do this, the unbelievers and dissemblers were many, and truly many, they 
were sure to have supported such a contest and would have advertised it widely. Just 
as they  

 

224

spread  everything  that  was  against  Islam.  And  if  someone  had  disputed  the  Qur’an 
and they had made it known to everyone, it would certainly have been recorded in the 
books  of  history  in  glittering  terms.  But  all  the  histories  and  books  are  in  evidence; 
apart from a few passages about Musaylima the Liar, there is nothing in any of them. 
Whereas  for  twenty-three  years  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  continuously  taunted  and 
challenged them in a way that would increase their obduracy. It in effect said: 

“Let  someone  unlettered  like  Muhammad  the  Trustworthy  compose  the  like  of 
the Qur’an. You won’t be able to, so come on, not an unlettered person, let someone 
very  learned and literary do it. You won’t be able to do that either, so rather than a 
single  person, gather  together  all  your  scholars and  men  of  eloquence,  and  let  them 
assist  one  another,  and  the  false  gods  on  which  you rely  can  also  lend  a  hand.  You 
won’t be able to do this either, so use the literary works of the past, and even call on 
those of the future to help you, and then compose the like of the Qur’an. And if  you 
can’t do this, don’t compose all the Qur’an, but only ten Suras. You won’t be able to 
manage ten which are truly  like the Qur’an’s Suras, so put it together out of stories 
and fictitious tales; just produce something similar to the word-order and eloquence. 
And don’t write a long Sura, just a short one. But if  you can’t do this, your religion, 
lives, property, and families will all be in danger, both in this world and in the next!” 

With these eight alternatives, the Wise Qur’an has challenged and silenced men 
and jinn, not for twenty-three years, but for one thousand three hundred. Nonetheless, 
in  those  early  times,  those  unbelievers  did  not  have  recourse  to  the  easiest  way, 
dispute or  contest,  but  chose  the  most  difficult  way,  that  of  war,  putting  their  lives, 
possessions, and families into danger. That means, it was not possible to dispute it. 

Wouldn’t any  intelligent person, particularly the  people of Arabia at that time – 
and the Quraysh, who were very clever – have ensured that one of their literary men 
composed  a  Sura  similar  to  one  of  the  Qur’an’s  and  so  be  saved  from  its  attacks; 
would they have abandoned the short and easy way, cast all they possessed into peril, 
and travelled the way most fraught with difficulties? 

In Short: As the famous Jahiz put it: “Dispute with words was not possible, so 

they were compelled to fight with the sword.” 

I f  i t  i s  a s k e d : Some learned scholars have said that not one of the Qur’an’s 
Suras, but not a single of its  verses can be disputed, nor even a single  sentence or a 
word,  nor  have  they  been  disputed.  But  this  appears  to  be  exaggerated  and 
unacceptable to reason, for many human words resemble those of the Qur’an. Why do 
they say this? 

 

225

T h e  A n s w e r : There  are two schools of thought concerning the Qur’an’s 

miraculousness and inimitability.  

The  prevailing  and preferred  school  states  that  the  subtle  qualities  of  eloquence 

and meaning in the Qur’an are beyond human power. 

The  second  and  less  preferred  school  states  that  it  is  within  human  ability  to 
dispute one of the Qur’an’s Suras, but Almighty God has prevented this as a miracle 
of  Muhammad (UWBP).  Like a  man  may  rise  to  his  feet,  but  if  a  prophet tells  him 
that he cannot and he is unable to, then it is a miracle. This opinion is called the Sarfa 
School. That is, Almighty God prevented men and jinn from successfully disputing a 
single of the Qur’an’s Suras. According to this school, scholars who state that a single 
of  its  words  cannot  be  disputed,  are  correct.  Because  since  on  account  of  its 
miraculousness Almighty God prevented them, they could not so much as open their 
mouths  to  dispute  it.  And  even  if  they  had  done  so,  they  could  not  have  uttered  a 
word. 

However,  according  to  the  first-mentioned  prevalent  and  preferred  school  of 
thought,  that  statement  of  scholars  includes  the  following  subtlety:  the  All-Wise 
Qur’an’s phrases and words look to one another. It sometimes  happens that a single 
word looks to ten places; in it are ten relationships and ten fine points of eloquence. 
We have pointed out examples of some of these in the commentary called Isharat al-
I‘jaz (Signs of Miraculousness), in the phrases of Sura al-Fatiha and those of,  “Alif. 
Lam. Mim. * This is the Book; in it is guidance sure, without doubt.”(2:1-2) 

For  example,  take  a  highly  decorated  palace;  to  situate  in  relation  to  all  the 
decorations  a  stone  which  is  like  the  central  point  of  many  varied  decorations,  is 
dependent on knowing the entire wall together with all its decorations. And to situate 
the pupil of the eye  in a human  head is dependent on knowing  its relations with the 
whole body and all the body’s wondrous functions, together with the eye’s position in 
the  face  of  those  duties.  In  just  the  same  way,  the  most  advanced  of  the  people  of 
reality  have  demonstrated  numerous  relationships  between  the  Qur’an’s  words  and 
their  aspects  and  connections,  and  other  verses  and  phrases.  Scholars  of  the  Hurufi 
School  in  particular  have  gone  further,  explaining  and  demonstrating  to  their 
followers a page of hidden meanings in a single of the Qur’an’s letters. 

Furthermore, since it is the speech of the Creator of all things, each of its words 
may be like a heart or seed; that is, a heart contained in an immaterial body formed of 
mysteries, or the seed of an immaterial tree. 

Thus, words like those of the Qur’an, and even phrases or verses, may occur in 

man’s speech, but an all-encompassing knowledge is necessary to  

 

226

situate  them  exactly  as  they  are  in  the  Qur’an,  taking  into  account  the  many 
relationships. 

Third Point 

A  brief  but  true  reflection  on  the  essential  nature  of  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous 
Exposition was once inspired in my heart as a divine bounty. Now I will give below a 
translation of that Arabic piece. 

The  six  aspects  of  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  are  brilliant  and 
luminous; neither  doubt  nor  misgiving  can  penetrate  it.  For  its  back leans  on  God’s 
Throne;  there  is  the  light  of  revelation  in  that  aspect.  Before  it  and  its  goal  is  the 
happiness  of  this  world  and  the  next;  it  has  laid  its  hand  on  post-eternity  and  the 
hereafter, and contains the light of happiness and Paradise. Above it shines the seal of 
miraculousness. Beneath it lie the pillars of proof and evidence. Its inner face is pure 
guidance, while its right causes the mind to affirm it with phrases like “Will they not 
think?”  Providing  spiritual  sustenance  to  hearts,  its  left  causes  the  conscience  to 
testify to God’s blessings. So from what side, what corner, can the thieves of doubt 
and misgiving enter the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition? 

Yes,  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  encompasses  all  the  points  of 
agreement found in the books of the prophets, the saints, and those who affirm divine 
unity, whose centuries, ways, and temperaments were all different; that is, those who 
sought the truth through either the intellect or the heart mentioned in their books the 
All-Wise Qur’an’s concise decrees and principles, in such a way as to confirm them. 
Thus, they are like the roots of the heavenly tree of the Qur’an.  

The  All-Wise  Qur’an  is  also  founded  on  revelation  and  is  revelation.  For  the 
Glorious One who revealed it, demonstrated and proved it was revelation through the 
miracles of Muhammad (UWBP). And the Qur’an too, which reveals, shows through 
the miraculousness upon it that it comes from the Divine Throne. Then the alarm of 
the  Most  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  to  whom  it  was 
revealed, when it was first revealed and his unconscious state during its revelation and 
his sincerity and veneration towards the Qur’an, which were greater than everyone’s, 
all demonstrate that it was revelation coming from pre-eternity; it was his guest. 

Moreover,  the  Qur’an  is  self-evidently  pure  guidance,  for  its  opposite  is  the 
misguidance of unbelief. It is also of necessity the source of the lights of belief, and 
the reverse of this is of course, darkness. We have proved this decisively in many of 
the Words. 

Furthermore,  the  Qur’an  is  of  a  certainty  the  assembly  of  truths;  illusion  and 

superstition cannot intrude on it. The elevated perfections which the  

 

227

world of Islam, to which it gave form, and the Shari‘a, which it put forward, display 
testify  and  prove  that  it  is  pure  truth  and  contains  no  contradictions.  Its  discussions 
concerning  the  world  of  the  Unseen  testify  to  this  too,  like  those  concerning  the 
Manifest World. 

Without doubt, the Qur’an also leads to the happiness of this world and the next, 
and urges man to it. If anyone doubts this, let him read the Qur’an once and heed what 
it says. Moreover, the fruits the Qur’an produces are both perfect and living. In which 
case, the roots of the tree of the Qur’an are founded on reality and are living. For the 
life of the fruit points to the life of the tree. See, how many perfect, living, luminous 
fruits it has produced each century, such as the saints and purified scholars! 

Also, with a conviction arising from innumerable various signs, it may be said the 
Qur’an is accepted and sought after by both men, and jinn, and angels, for when it is 
recited, they gather around, drawn to it like moths. 

And  together  with  being  revelation,  the  Qur’an  has  been  strengthened  and 
fortified with rational proofs; the unanimity of the wise and intelligent testifies to this. 
The great scholars of theology, and the geniuses of philosophy like Ibn Sina and Ibn 
Rushd  unanimously  demonstrated  the  Qur’anic  principles,  in  accordance  with  their 
own methods and proofs. 

The Qur’an is also affirmed by all sound natures. So long as it is not corrupted in 
any way, human nature confirms it. For an easy conscience and peace of mind are to 
be  found  through  its  lights.  That  is  to  say,  unspoilt  human  nature  affirms  it  through 
the testimony of a tranquil conscience, and says to the Qur’an through the tongue of 
disposition:  “Our  natures  cannot  be  perfected  without  you!”  We  have  proved  this 
truth in many places. 

The  Qur’an  is  also  observedly  and  self-evidently  an  eternal  and  perpetual 
miracle; it always displays its miraculousness. It never dies away like other miracles; 
its time never comes to an end; it is everlasting. 

Furthermore,  there  is  such  breadth  in  the  Qur’an’s  guidance  that  the  Angel 
Gabriel and a young child may listen to its same lesson side by side, and both receive 
their share. And a brilliant philosopher like Ibn Sina may study the same of its lessons 
side  by  side  with  an  ordinary  reciter, and  they  both  will  receive  their  instruction.  It 
may even  happen that due to the strength  and purity of  his belief, the common man 
may benefit more than Ibn Sina. 

Also, there is in the Qur’an an eye that sees and encompasses the whole universe, 
and holds it before it like the pages of a book, describing its levels and worlds. Like a 
watchmaker  turns,  opens,  shows,  and describes  his  clock, the  Qur’an  does  the  same 
with  the  universe,  as  though  it  were  holding  it  in  its  hand.  The  Qur’an  of  Mighty 
Stature is thus;  it declares: “Know that there is no god but God,” and proclaims the 
divine unity. 

 

228

O God! Make the Qur’an our companion in this world, and a friend for us in 
the grave, and at the resurrection an intercessor, and on the Bridge a light, 
and from the Fire a shield and screen, and in Paradise a companion, and in 
all good works, a guide and leader. O God! Illuminate our hearts and graves 
with the light of belief and the Qur’an; and illumine the proof of the Qur’an 
for  the  sake  of  and  in  veneration  of  the  one  to  whom  the  Qur’an  was 
revealed, and grant blessings and peace to him and his Family from the Most 
Merciful One, the Gentle One. Amen. 

NINETEENTH SIGN 

It has been proved in the previous Signs most decisively and indubitably that the 
Most  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  was  God  Almighty’s 
Messenger.  His  messengership  being  thus  established  through  thousands  of  certain 
evidences,  Muhammad  the  Arabian  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  was  the 
most brilliant and conclusive proof of divine unity and eternal happiness. In this Sign, 
we  shall  offer  a  concise  and  summary  definition  of  that  shining  evidence,  that 
articulate proof. For since he is the proof and his conclusion is knowledge of God, we 
must  surely  recognize  the  proof  and  learn  the  manner  of  his  evidence.  With  an 
extremely brief summary, therefore, we shall describe in what ways he is a proof of it 
and its correctness. It is as follows: 

Like  all  the  beings  in  the  universe,  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace)  pointed  through  his  own  self  to  the  Creator  of  the  universe’s 
existence  and  unity;  and  he  proclaimed  with  his  tongue  that  evidence  of  his  self, 
together with the evidence offered by all beings. Since he himself was the evidence, 
we  shall  point  in  fifteen  Principles  to  his  proof  and  integrity,  his  truthfulness  and 
veracity. 

First Principle:This proof, who indicated the universe’s Maker with both his self, 
and his tongue, and his conduct, and his speech, was both verified by the reality of the 
universe,  and  was veracious.  For  the  evidence  to  divine  unity made by  all  beings  is 
surely confirmation of the one who proclaimed that unity. That is to say, the cause he 
proclaimed  is  verified  by  the  whole  universe.  Also,  since  the  perfection  of  divine 
unity  and  absolute  good  of  eternal  happiness  he  expounded  are  in  agreement  and 
conformity  with  the  beauty  and  perfection  of  all  the  truths  of  the  world,  he  was 
certainly veracious in his cause. That is to say, the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be 
blessings and peace) was an articulate proof of divine unity and eternal happiness who 
was both veracious and verified. 

Second Principle: Also, since that veracious and verified proof per 

 

229

formed  thousands  of  miracles  greater  than  all  the  previous  prophets,  came  with  a 
Shari‘a  that  will  never  be  abrogated,  and  his  call  was  to  all  men  and  jinn,  he  was 
surely the chief of the prophets, and therefore gathered together in himself the essence 
and  unanimity  of  all  their  miracles.  That  means  the  strength  of  the  prophet’s 
consensus and the testimony of their miracles forms a support for his truthfulness and 
veracity. He was also the master and leader of all the saints and purified scholars, who 
attained to perfection through his training and guidance and the light of his Shari‘a. In 
which  case,  gathered  together  in  him  were  the  mystery  of  their  wonders,  their 
unanimous affirmation, and the  strength of their  verifications. For they travelled the 
way their master opened up and left open, and they found the truth. In which case, all 
their wonder-working and verifications and consensus forms a support for their sacred 
master’s truthfulness and veracity. Also, as was seen in the previous Signs, this proof 
of  divine  unity  was  equipped  with  such  certain,  evident,  and  definite  miracles  and 
wondrous irhasat, and his prophethood was proved by such irrefutable evidences that 
their  affirmation  could  not  be  disputed,  even  if  the  whole  universe  were  to  unite 
against him. 

Third  Principle:  And  in  that  herald  of  divine  unity  and  giver  of  the  tidings  of 
eternal  happiness,  who  was  himself  a  clear  miracle,  were  such  elevated  moral 
qualities,  and  in  the  duties  of  his  messengership  such  sublime  attributes,  and  in  the 
Shari‘a  he  propagated  such  high  virtues,  that  even  his  most  bitter  enemy  had  to 
confirm them, being unable to deny them. Since the highest and best moral qualities, 
the most elevated and perfect attributes, and the most precious and acceptable virtues 
were  present  in  his  self,  his  duties,  and  his  religion,  for  sure,  that  person  was  the 
exemplar,  model,  personification,  and  master  of  the  perfections  and  elevated  moral 
qualities  in  beings.  In  which  case,  those  perfections  in  his  self,  his  duty,  and  his 
religion form a support for his veracity and truthfulness so powerful that it can in no 
way be shaken. 

Fourth  Principle:  And  that  herald  of  divine  unity  and  happiness,  who  was  the 
source of perfections and teacher of elevated virtues, did not speak of himself; he was 
made to speak. Yes, he was made to speak by the Creator of the universe. He received 
instruction  from  his  Pre-Eternal  Master,  then  he  taught.  For  the  universe’s  Creator 
showed through the thousands of proofs of his prophethood, in part described in the 
above Signs, through all those miracles He created through his hand, that he was not 
speaking on his own account, but conveying His speech. Furthermore, the Qur’an that 
came to him shows through its forty aspects of miraculousness, outer and inner, that 
he was Almighty God’s interpreter. Also, through all  

 

230

his  sincerity,  fear  of  God,  seriousness,  reliability,  and  all  his  other  qualities  and 
conduct, he showed that he was not speaking his own ideas in his own name, but was 
speaking  in  the  name  of  his  Creator.  In  addition,  all  those  who  penetrate  to  reality 
who heed him have affirmed him with the truths they have investigated and laid open; 
they have believed with knowledge of certainty (ilmelyakîn) that he was not speaking 
on his own behalf, but that the Creator of the universe was causing him to speak and 
teaching, teaching by means of him. In which case, his veracity and truthfulness are 
supported by the consensus of these four powerful principles. 

Fifth  Principle:  And  that  Interpreter  of  Pre-Eternal  Speech  saw  spirit  beings, 
conversed with angels, and offered guidance to men and jinn. He received knowledge 
surpassing the world of men and jinn, and even the worlds of spirits and the angels; he 
had access to, and relationships with, the realms that lie beyond theirs. The miracles 
mentioned  previously  and  the  story  of  his  life,  which  have  the  authenticity  of 
consensus, all prove this fact. In which case, unlike soothsayers and others who give 
news  of  the  Unseen,  no  jinn,  no  spirit  being,  no  angel,  and  apart  from  Gabriel,  not 
even the highest angels in attendance on God Almighty, could interfere in the tidings 
he gave. And on some occasions, he even left Gabriel, his companion, behind. 

Sixth Principle: And that person, the lord of the angels, jinn, and men, was the 
most illumined and perfect fruit of the tree of the universe, and the personification of 
divine mercy, and the exemplar of dominical love, and the most luminous proof of the 
Truth,  and  the  most  radiant  lamp  of  reality,  and  the  key  to  the  talisman  of  the 
universe, and the solver of the riddle of creation, and the expounder of the wisdom of 
the  world, and the  herald of divine sovereignty, and the describer of the beauties of 
dominical art, and in regard to the comprehensiveness of  his disposition, he was the 
most complete example of the perfections of beings. In which case, these attributes of 
his and his spiritual personality indicate, indeed, show that this being was the ultimate 
cause of the universe’s existence; that is to say, the universe’s Creator looked to this 
being  and  created  the  universe.  It  may  be  said  that  if  He  had  not  created  him,  He 
would not have created the universe. Yes, the truths of the Qur’an and lights of belief 
he brought to men and jinn, and the elevated virtues and exalted perfections apparent 
in his being are a decisive witness to this fact. 

Seventh Principle: And that proof of the Truth and lamp of reality demonstrated 
a  religion  and  Shari‘a  that  comprise  principles  ensuring  the  happiness  of  this  world 
and  the  next.  Moreover,  besides  being  comprehensive,  they  explain  with  complete 
correctness the universe’s truths and functions,  

 

231

and the Creator of the universe’s names and attributes. Thus, Islam and the Shari‘a are 
so comprehensive and perfect, and describe the universe and Himself in such a way, 
that  anyone  who  studies  them  carefully  is  bound to understand  that  his  religion  is  a 
declaration,  a  manifesto,  describing  both  the  One  who  made this beautiful  universe, 
and the universe  itself. In the  same way that a palace’s builder writes an  instruction 
sheet suitable to the palace  so that  he may describe himself through  its  features, the 
religion  and  Shari‘a  of  Muhammad  (UWBP)  demonstrate  through  their  clear 
elevatedness, comprehensiveness, and truth that  his religion proceeded from the pen 
of the One who creates and regulates the universe. Whoever ordered the universe so 
well  is the  One who ordered this religion equally well. Yes, the perfect order of the 
one requires the perfect order of the other. 

Eighth Principle: Thus qualified by the above-mentioned attributes and sustained 
by totally unshakeable, powerful supports, Muhammad the Arabian (Upon whom be 
blessings  and  peace) proclaimed  his  message  over  the  heads  of  men  and  jinn  in  the 
name  of  the  World  of  the  Unseen,  turned  to  the  Manifest  World;  he  addressed  the 
peoples and nations waiting beyond the centuries of the future; he called out to all jinn 
and men; he made all places and all times hear. Yes, we too hear! 

Ninth  Principle:  His  address  is  so  elevated  and  powerful  that  all  the  centuries 

heed it. Yes, all the centuries hear the echo of his voice. 

Tenth  Principle: It  is  apparent  from  that  person’s  (UWBP)  manner  that  he  saw, 
and  spoke  accordingly.  For  at  times  of  greatest  peril,  he  spoke  unhesitatingly, 
fearlessly, with utter steadfastness. On occasion he challenged the whole world on his 
own. 

Eleventh  Principle:  With  all  his  strength  he  made  so  powerful  a  call  and 
summons that he caused half the earth and a fifth of mankind to respond to his voice, 
declaring: “Yes, we have heard and we obey!” 

Twelfth  Principle:  He  called  with  such  seriousness  and 

instructed  so 
fundamentally that he inscribed his principles on the face of the centuries and on the 
very stones of all corners of the world; he engraved them on the face of time. 

Thirteenth  Principle:  He  proclaimed  the  soundness  of  the  injunctions  he 
conveyed  with  such  confidence  and  sureness,  that  should  the  whole  world  have 
gathered, they could not have made him revoke or abjure a single of those precepts. 
Witness to this are all his life and his illustrious biography. 

Fourteenth Principle: He called and summoned with such confidence and trust 
that he became obliged to no one and no difficulty upset him; with complete sincerity 
and honesty, he accepted before anyone the  

 

232

precepts he had brought, and acted accordingly, and proclaimed them. Witness to this 
were  his  famous  asceticism  and  independence  and  his  never  stooping  to  the 
ephemeral glitter of this world, which were well-known by everyone, friend and foe. 

Fifteenth Principle:  His obedience to the religion he brought, and his worship of 
his  Maker,  and  his  abstaining  from  whatever  was  forbidden,  all  of  which  he 
performed  to  a  greater  degree  than  everyone  else,  demonstrate  conclusively  that  he 
was the envoy  and herald of the Monarch of Pre-Eternity and Post-Eternity;  he was 
the most sincere servant of the One who is worshipped by right, and the interpreter of 
His pre-eternal word. 

The conclusion of these fifteen Principles is this: the one qualified by the above-
mentioned  attributes  proclaimed  divine  unity  with  all  his  strength  repeatedly  and 
constantly throughout his life, saying: “So know that there is no god but God.” 

O  God, grant him blessings  and peace  to  the number  of good deeds  of his 
community, and to his Family. 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise!(2:32) 

 

233

A Divine Gift 
And a Mark of Dominical Favour 

In the hope of complying with the meaning of the verse, “But the favour of your 
Sustainer, rehearse and proclaim,”(93:11) I shall mention a mark of Almighty God’s 
favour and mercy that was apparent in the writing of this treatise, so that those who 
read it may understand its importance. 

I  had  no  intention  of  writing  this  treatise,  for  the  Nineteenth  and  Thirty-First 
Words  about  the  messengership  of  Muhammad  (UWBP)  had  been  written.  Then 
suddenly I felt a compelling impulse to write it. Also my power of memory had been 
extinguished due to the calamities I had suffered. Moreover, in  accordance with my 
way, I had not taken the path of narrative, that is, “he said that,” “it was said that,” in 
the  works  I  had  written.  Furthermore,  I  had  no  books  of  Hadith  or  the  Prophet’s 
(UWBP) biography available to me. Nevertheless, saying: “I place my trust in God,” I 
began.  It  was  extremely  successful  and  my  memory  assisted  me  in  a  way  that 
surpassed even that of the Old Said. Thirty to forty pages were written at speed every 
two or  three  hours.  Once  fifteen pages  were  written  in  a  single  hour.  It  was  mostly 
narrated from such books as Bukhari, Muslim, Bayhaqi, Tirmidhi, al-Shifa’ al-Sharif, 
Abu  Nu‘aym,  and  Tabari.  My  heart  was  trembling,  because  if  there  had  been  any 
error in relating them – since they are Hadiths – it would have been a sin. But it was 
clear that divine favour was with us and there was need for the treatise. God willing, 
what has been written is sound. If perhaps there are any errors in the wording of some 
of the Hadiths or in the names of the narrators, I request that my brothers will look on 
them tolerantly and correct them. 

                                                              S a i d  N u r s i 

Ustad Said Nursi, our master, dictated and we wrote the first draft. He had no books with 
him,  nor  did  he  refer  to  any.  He  would  suddenly  dictate  at  great  speed,  and  we  wrote.  We 
would write thirty,  forty,  and sometimes  more, pages  in two  or three  hours. We  formed the 
conviction  that  this  ease  was  itself  a  wonder  proceeding  from  the  miracles  of  the  Prophet 
Muhammad (UWBP). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

234

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

234

The First Addendum 
to The Miracles of Muhammad (UWBP) 

 [The Nineteenth Word about the Messengership of Muhammad (UWBP) and 
the Miracle of the Splitting of the Moon have been included here because of 
their relevance] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 

This Word consists of fourteen “Droplets,” and is also the Fourteenth Flash 

First Droplet 

There are three great and universal things which make known to us our Sustainer. 
One  is the  Book  of  the  Universe,  a  jot of  whose  testimony we  have  heard  from  the 
thirteen  Flashes  together  with  the  Thirteenth  Lesson  of  the  Arabic  Risale-i  Nur. 
Another is the Seal of the Prophets (Upon whom be blessings and peace), the supreme 
sign of the book of the universe. And the other is the Qur’an of Mighty Stature. Now, 
we must become acquainted with the Seal of the Prophets (Upon whom be blessings 
and peace), who is the second, articulate, proof, and must listen to him. 

Yes, behold the collective personality of this proof! The face of the earth  is  his 
mosque,  Mecca,  his  mihrab,  and  Medina,  his  pulpit.  Our  Prophet  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace),  this  clear  proof,  is  the  leader  of  all  believers,  preacher  to  all 
mankind,  the chief of  all  the  prophets,  the  lord of  all  the  saints,  and  the  leader of  a 
circle  for  the  remembrance  of  God  comprising  the  prophets  and  saints.  He  is  a 
luminous tree whose living roots are all the prophets, and fresh fruits are all the saints; 
whose  claims  all  the  prophets  relying  on  their  miracles  and  all  the  saints  relying  on 
their wonder-working confirm and corroborate. For he declares and claims: “There is 
no god but God!” All on left and right, that is, those  

 

235

luminous reciters of God’s names lined up in the past and the future, repeat the same 
words, and through their consensus as though declare: “You speak the truth and what 
you  say  is  right!”  What  false  idea  has  the  power  to  intrude  on  a  claim  that  is  thus 
affirmed and corroborated by thousands? 

Second Droplet 

Just  as  that  luminous  proof  of  divine  unity  is  affirmed  by  the  unanimity  and 
consensus of those two wings, so was he confirmed and corroborated by hundreds of 
allusions in such revealed scriptures as the Torah and Bible.1 So too, the thousands of 
signs that appeared before the beginning of his mission, and the well-known tidings of 
the  voices  from  the  Unseen  and  the  unanimous  testimony  of  the  soothsayers,  the 
indications of the thousands of his miracles such as the Splitting of the Moon, and the 
justice  of  Shari‘a,  all  confirmed  and  corroborated  him.  Similarly,  in  his  person,  his 
laudable morals, which were at the peak of perfection; and in his duties, his complete 
confidence  and  elevated  qualities,  which  were  of  the  highest  excellence;  and  his 
extraordinary  fear  of  God,  worship,  seriousness,  and  fortitude,  which  demonstrated 
the strength of his belief, and his total certainty and his complete steadfastness – these 
all showed as clearly as the sun how utterly faithful he was to his cause. 

Third Droplet  

If  you  wish,  come!  Let  us  go  to  Arabian  Peninsula,  to  the  Era  of  Bliss!  In  our 
imaginations,  we  shall  see  him  at  his  duties  and  visit  him.  Look!  We  see  a  person 
distinguished  by  his  fine  character  and  beautiful  form.  In  his  hand  is  a  miraculous 
book and on his tongue, a truthful address; he is delivering a pre-eternal sermon to all 
mankind,  indeed,  to  man,  jinn,  and  the  angels,  and  to  all  beings.  He  solves  and 
expounds  the  obscure  riddle  of  the  world’s  creation;  he  discovers  and  solves  the 
abstruse  talisman  which  is  the  mystery  of  the  universe;  and he  provides  convincing 
and satisfying answers to the three awesomely difficult questions that are asked of all 
beings and have always bewildered and occupied minds: “Where do you come from? 
What are you doing here? Where are you going?” 

Fourth Droplet 

See!  He  spreads  such  a  light  of  truth  that  if  you  look  at  the  universe  as  being 

outside the luminous sphere of his truth and guidance, you see it to  

                                                 
1 In his Risale-i Hamidiye, Husain Jisri found one hundred and fourteen indications in those scriptures. 
If this many remained after the texts had been corrupted, there must surely have been many explicit 
mentions previously. 

 

236

be a place of general mourning, and beings strangers to one another and hostile, and 
inanimate beings to be like ghastly corpses and living creatures like orphans weeping 
at  the  blows  of  death  and  separation.  Now  look!  Through  the  light  he  spreads,  that 
place  of universal  mourning  has  been  transformed  into  a  place  where  God’s  names 
and  praises  are  recited  in  joy  and  ecstasy.  The  foreign,  hostile  beings  have  become 
friends  and  brothers.  While  the  dumb, dead  inanimate  creatures  all  become  familiar 
officials  and  docile  servants.  And  the  weeping,  complaining  orphans  are  seen  to  be 
either reciting God’s names and praises or offering thanks at being released from their 
duties. 

Fifth Droplet 

Also,  through  his  light,  the  motion  and  movement  of  the  universe,  and  its 
variations,  changes  and  transformations,  cease  being  meaningless,  futile,  and  the 
playthings of chance and rise to the level of being dominical missives, pages inscribed 
with  the  signs  of  creation,  and  mirrors  to  the  divine  names,  while  the  world  itself 
becomes a book of the Eternally Besought One’s wisdom. Man’s boundless weakness 
and  impotence  make  him  inferior  to  all  other  animals  and  his  intelligence,  an 
instrument of  grief, sorrow, and sadness, makes  him more wretched,  yet when  he  is 
illumined  with  that  light,  he  rises  above  all  animals  and  all  creatures.  Through 
entreaty,  his  illuminated  impotence,  poverty,  and  intelligence  make  him  a  petted 
monarch; due to his complaints, he becomes a spoiled vicegerent of the earth. That is 
to  say,  if  it  were  not  for  his  light,  the  universe  and  man,  and  all  things,  would  be 
nothing.  Yes,  certainly  such  a  person  is  necessary  in  such  a  wondrous  universe; 
otherwise it and the firmament would not be in existence. 

Sixth Droplet 

That person (UWBP) announces and brings the good news of eternal happiness; 
he  is  the  discoverer  and proclaimer  of  an  infinite  mercy, the  herald  and observer  of 
the beauties of the sovereignty of dominicality, and the discloser and displayer of the 
treasures of the divine  names. If  you regard him  in that way, that is  in regard to his 
being  a  worshipful  servant  of  God,  you  will  see  him  to  be  the  model  of  love,  the 
exemplar of mercy, the glory of mankind, and the most luminous fruit of the tree of 
creation. While if you look in this way, that is, in regard to his messengership, you see 
him to be the proof of God, the lamp of truth, the sun of guidance, and the means to 
happiness. And look!  His  light  has  lit up east and west like dazzling lightning!  Half 
the earth and a fifth of mankind have accepted the  

 

237

gift  of  his  guidance  and  preserved  it  like  life  itself.  So  how  is  it  that  our  evil-
commanding souls and satans do not accept with all its degrees, the basis of all such a 
person (UWBP) claimed, that is, “There is no god but God?” 

Seventh Droplet 

Now, consider how, eradicating  in  no time at  all  their evil, savage customs and 
habits  to  which  they  were  fanatically  attached,  he  decked  out  the  various  wild, 
unyielding  peoples  of  that  broad  peninsula  with  the  finest  virtues,  and  made  them 
teachers of all the world and masters to the civilized nations. See, it was not just an 
outward  domination;  he  conquered  and  subjugated  their  minds,  spirits,  hearts,  and 
souls. He became the beloved of hearts, the teacher of minds, the trainer of souls, the 
ruler of spirits. 

Eighth Droplet 

You know that a small habit like cigarette smoking among a small nation can be 
eradicated  permanently  only  by  a  powerful  ruler  with  great  effort.  But  look!  This 
person  (UWBP)  eliminated  numerous  ingrained  habits  from  intractable,  fanatical 
large nations with slight outward power and little effort in a short period of time, and 
in  their  place  he  so  established  exalted qualities  that  they became  as  firm as  if  they 
had  mingled  with  their  very  blood.  He  achieved  very  many  extraordinary  feats  like 
this. Thus, we present the Arabian Peninsula as a challenge to those who refuse to see 
the  testimony  of  the  blessed  age  of  the  Prophet  (UWBP).  Let  them  each  take  a 
hundred philosophers, go there, and strive for a hundred years: would they be able to 
carry out in that time one hundredth of what he achieved in a year? 

Ninth Droplet 

Also,  you  know  that  an  insignificant  man  of  small  standing  among  a  small 
community in a disputed matter of small importance cannot tell a small but shameful 
lie brazenfaced and fearlessly without displaying anxiety or disquiet enough to inform 
the enemies at his side of his deception. Now look at that person (UWBP); although 
he undertook a tremendous task which required an official of great authority and great 
standing and a situation of great security, can any contradiction at all be found in the 
words  he  uttered  among  a  community  of  great  size  in  the  face  of  great  hostility 
concerning  a  great  cause  and  matters  of  great  significance,  with  great  ease  and 
freedom,  without  fear,  hesitation,  diffidence,  or  anxiety,  with  pure  sincerity,  great 
seriousness, and in an intense, elevated manner that angered his  

 

238

enemies? Is it at all possible that any trickery should have been involved? God forbid! 
“It is naught but Revelation inspired.”(53:4) The truth does not deceive, and one who 
perceives the truth is not deceived. His way which is truth is free of deception. How 
could a fancy appear to be truth to one who sees the truth, and deceive him? 

Tenth Droplet 

shows and matters he proves. 

Now, look! What curiosity-arousing, attractive, necessary, and awesome truths he 

You know that what impels man most is curiosity. Even, if it were to be said to 
you:  “Hand  over  half  of  your  life  and  property,  and  someone  will  come  from  the 
moon  and  Jupiter  and  tell  you  all  about  them.  He  will  also  tell  you  the  truth  about 
your  future  and  what  will  happen  to  you.”  You  would  be  sure  to  give  them  if  you 
have any curiosity at all. Whereas that person (UWBP) tells of a Monarch  in whose 
realm, the moon flies round a moth like a fly, and the moth, the earth, flutters round a 
lamp, and the lamp, the sun, is merely one lamp among thousands in one of his guest-
houses out of thousands.  

Also, he speaks truly of a world so wondrous and a revolution so tremendous that 
if the earth were a bomb and exploded it would not be all that strange. Look! Listen to 
some of the Suras he is reciting: “When the sun is folded up.”(81:1) * “When the sky 
is cleft asunder.”(81:2) * “[The Day] of Noise and Clamour.”(101:1)  

Also,  he  speaks  truly  of  a  future  in  comparison  with  which  the  future  in  this 
world  is  a  tiny  mirage.  And  he  describes  most  earnestly  such  happiness  that  it 
resembles an eternal sun in comparison with the fleeting lightning-flash of happiness 
in this world. 

Eleventh Droplet 

Surely  wonders  await  us  beneath  the  outer  veil  of  the  universe,  which  is  thus 
strange  and  perplexing.  So  one  thus  wonderful  and  extraordinary,  a  displayer  of 
marvels, is necessary to tell of its wonders. It is apparent from that person’s conduct 
that he has seen them, and sees them, and says that he has seen them. He instructs us 
most soundly concerning what the God of the heavens and the earth, who nurtures us 
with  His  bounties,  wants  and  desires  of  us.  Everyone,  therefore,  should  leave 
everything  and  hasten  to  this  person  and  heed  the  numerous  other  necessary  and 
curiosity-arousing truths like these that he teaches. So how is it that most people are 
deaf and blind, and mad even, that they do not see this truth, and not listen to it and 
understand it? 

 

239

Twelfth Droplet 

Just as this person (UWBP) is an articulate proof and evidence as true as the unity 
of  the  Creator  of  beings;  so  he  is  a  decisive  proof  and  clear  evidence  for  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead  and  eternal  happiness.  Indeed,  with  his  guidance  he  is  the 
reason  for  eternal  happiness  coming  about  and  is  the  means  of  attaining  it;  so  too, 
through his prayers and supplications, he is the cause of its existence and reason for 
its  creation.  We  repeat  here  this  mystery,  which  is  mentioned  in  the  Tenth  Word, 
because of its relevance (lit. station.) 

See! This Person (UWBP) prays with a prayer so supreme it is as if the Arabian 
Peninsula and the earth too perform the prayers through his majestic prayer, and offer 
entreaties.  See,  he  entreats  in  a  congregation  so  vast  it  is  as  if  all  the  luminous, 
perfected members of mankind from the time of Adam till our age and until the end of 
time,  are  following  him  and  saying  “Amen”  to  his  supplications.  And  see!  He  is 
beseeching for a need so universal that not only the dwellers of the earth, but those of 
the heavens, and all beings, join in his prayer, declaring: “Yes! O our Sustainer! Grant 
it  to  us!  We  too  want  it!”  He  supplicates with  such want,  so  sorrowfully,  in  such  a 
loving,  yearning,  and  beseeching  fashion2  that  he  brings  the  whole  cosmos  to  tears, 
making them join in his prayer. 

See! The purpose and aim of his prayer is such that it raises man and the world, 
and  all  creatures,  from  the  lowest  of  the  low,  from  inferiority,  worthlessness,  and 
uselessness  to  the  highest  of  the  high;  that  is,  to  having  value,  permanence,  and 
exalted duties. See! He seeks and pleads for help and mercy in a manner so elevated 
and  sweet,  it  is  as  if  he  makes  all  beings  and  the  heavens  and  the  earth  hear,  and 
bringing them to ecstasy, to exclaim: “Amen, O our God! Amen!” And see! He seeks 
his needs from One so Powerful, Hearing, and Munificent, One so Knowing, Seeing, 
and Compassionate, that He sees and hears the most secret need of the most obscure 
living being and its entreaties, accepts them, and has mercy on it. For He gives what is 
asked  for,  if  only  through  the  tongue  of  disposition.  And  He  gives  it  in  so  Wise, 
Seeing,  and  Compassionate  a  form  that  it  leaves  no  doubt  that  His  nurturing  and 
regulation  is  particular  to  Him,  the  All-Hearing  and  All-Seeing  One,  the  Most 
Generous and Most Compassionate One. 

                                                 
2 Tirmidhi, Da’awat, 30. 

 

240

Thirteenth Droplet 

What does he want, this pride of the human race, who taking behind him all the 
eminent of mankind, stands on top of the world, and raising up his hands, is praying? 
What is this unique being, who is truly the glory of the cosmos, seeking? Listen! He is 
seeking  eternal  happiness.  He  is  asking  for  eternal  life,  and  to  meet  with  God.  He 
wants Paradise. And he wants all the sacred divine names, which display their beauty 
and decrees in the mirrors of beings. Even if it were not for reasons for the fulfilment 
of  those  countless  requests,  like  mercy,  grace,  wisdom,  and  justice,  a  single  of  that 
Person’s (UWBP) prayers would have been sufficient for the construction of Paradise, 
the  creation of which  is as easy for divine power as the creation of the spring. Yes, 
just as his messengership was the reason for the opening of this place of examination 
and trial, so his worship and servitude of God were the reason of the opening of the 
next world. 

Would the perfect order observed in the universe, which has caused scholars and 
the  intelligent  to  pronounce:  “It  is  not  possible  for  there  to  be  anything  better  than 
what exists,”3 and the faultless beauty of art within mercy, the incomparable beauty of 
dominicality,  permit  the  ugliness,  the  cruelty,  the  lack  of  order  of  its  hearing  and 
responding  to  the  least  significant,  the  least  important  desires  and  voices,  and  its 
considering unimportant  the  most  important, the  most  necessary  wishes,  and  its  not 
hearing  or  understanding  them,  and  not  carrying  them  out?  God  forbid!  A  hundred 
thousand times, God forbid! Such a beauty would not permit such ugliness; it would 
not become ugly! 

My imaginary friend! That is enough for now, we must return. For if we remain a 
hundred  years  in  this  age  in  the  Arabian  Peninsula,  we  still  would  comprehend 
completely only one hundredth of the marvels of that Person’s (UWBP) duties and the 
wonders he carried out, and we would never tire of watching him. 

Now,  come!  We  shall  look  at  the  centuries,  which  will  turn  above us.  See  how 
each has opened like a flower through the effulgence it has received from that Sun of 
Guidance!  They  have  produced  millions  of  enlightened  fruits  like  Abu  Hanifa, 
Shafi‘i, Abu Bayazid Bistami, Shaikh ‘Abd al-Qadir Gilani, Shah Naqshband, Imam 
Ghazali and Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi. But postponing the details of our observations to 
another  time,  we  must  recite  some  benedictions  for  that  displayer  of  miracles  and 
bringer of guidance, which mention a number of his certain miracles: 

                                                 
3 Imam Gazâlî, Ihyâu Ulûmi’d-Din (Turk. trans.), iv, 258; Ibn ‘Arabi, al-Futuhat al-Makkiyya, i, 53; iv, 
154. 

 

241

Endless peace and blessings be upon our master Muhammad, to the number 
of  the  good  deeds  of  his  community,  to  whom  was  revealed  the  All-Wise 
Criterion  of  Truth  and  Falsehood,  from  One  Most  Merciful,  Most 
Compassionate,  from  the  Sublime  Throne;  whose  messengerhood  was 
foretold by the Torah and Bible, and told of by wondrous signs, the voices of 
jinn, saints of man, and soothsayers; at whose indication the moon split; our 
master  Muhammad!  Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him  thousands  and 
thousands of times, to the number of the breaths of his community; at whose 
beckoning  came  the  tree,  on  whose  prayer  rain  swiftly  fell,  and  whom  the 
cloud shaded from the heat; who satisfied a hundred men with his food; from 
between whose fingers three times flowed water like the Spring of Kawthar; 
and to whom God made speak the lizard, the gazelle, the wolf, the torso, the 
arm, the camel, the mountain, the rock, and the clod; the one who made the 
Ascension  and  whose  eye  did  not  waver;  our  master  and  intercessor, 
Muhammad! Peace and blessings be upon him thousands and thousands of 
times,  to  the  number  of  the  letters  of  the  Qur’an  formed  in  the  words 
represented  with  the  permission  of  the  Most  Merciful  in  the  mirrors  of  the 
airwaves  at the  reciting of all  the  words of  the  Qur’an by all  reciters from 
when it was first revealed to the end of time. And grant us forgiveness and 
have mercy on us, O God, for each of those blessings. Amen. 

[I  have  described  the  Evidences  for  Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  prophethood 
which  I  have  here  indicated  briefly,  in  a  Turkish  treatise  called  Şuaât-ı 
Mârifeti’n-Nebî and in the Nineteenth Letter  (The Miracles of Muhammad). 
There  too  aspects  of  the  All-Wise  Qur’an’s  miraculousness  have  been 
mentioned  briefly.  Again,  in  a  Turkish  treatise  called  Lemeât  and  in  the 
Twenty-Fifth  Word  (The  Miraculousness  of  the  Qur’an)  I  have  explained 
concisely  forty  ways  in  which  the  Qur’an  is  a  miracle  and  indicated  forty 
aspects  of  its  miraculousness.  Of  those  forty  aspects,  only  the  eloquence  in 
the word-order I have written in forty pages in an Arabic commentary called 
Signs  of  Miraculousness  (Isharat  al-I‘jaz).  If  you  have  the  need,  you  may 
refer to those three works.] 

Fourteenth Droplet 

The  All-Wise Qur’an,  the  treasury  of  miracles  and supreme  miracle, proves the 
prophethood of Muhammad (UWBP) together with divine unity  so decisively that it 
leaves  no  need  for  further  proof.  We  shall  therefore  give  its  definition  and  indicate 
one or two flashes of its miraculousness which have been the cause of criticism. 

 

242

The All-Wise Qur’an, which makes known to us our Sustainer, is as follows: it is 
the  pre-eternal  translator  of  the  great  book  of  the  universe;  the  discloser  of  the 
treasures of the divine names concealed in the pages of the earth and the heavens; the 
key  to  the  truths  hidden  beneath  the  lines  of  events;  the  treasury  of  the  Most 
Merciful’s favours and of the pre-eternal addresses, which issue forth from the World 
of the Unseen beyond the veil of this Manifest World; the sun, foundation, and plan of 
the spiritual world of Islam, and the map of the  worlds of the  hereafter; the distinct 
expounder,  lucid  exposition,  articulate  proof,  and  clear  translator  of  the  divine 
essence,  attributes,  and  deeds;  the  instructor,  true  wisdom,  guide,  and  leader  of  the 
world of  humanity;  it  is  both a  book  of  wisdom and law,  and  a book  of  prayer  and 
worship, and a book of command and summons, and a book of invocation and divine 
knowledge – it is book for all spiritual needs; and it is a sacred library offering books 
appropriate  to  the  ways  of  all  the  saints  and  veracious,  and  the  purified  and  the 
scholars, whose ways and paths are all different. 

Consider the flashes of miraculousness in  its repetitions, which are  imagined to 
be  a  fault:  since  the  Qur’an  is  both  a  book  of  invocation,  and  of  prayer,  and  of 
summons, the repetition in it is desirable, indeed, it is essential and most eloquent. It 
is  not  as  the  faulty  imagine.  For  the  mark  of  invocation  is  illumination  through 
repetition.  The  mark  of  prayer  is  strengthening  through  repetition.  The  mark  of 
command and summons is confirmation through repetition. Moreover, not everyone is 
capable  of  always  reading  the  whole  Qur’an,  but  mostly  is  able  to  read  one  Sura. 
Therefore, since the most important purposes of the Qur’an are included in the longer 
Suras, each is like a small Qur’an. That is to say, so that no one should be deprived, 
its purposes such as divine unity, the resurrection of the dead, and the story of Moses 
have  been  repeated.  Also,  like  bodily  needs,  spiritual  needs  are  various.  Man  is  in 
need of some things each breath; like the body needs air, the spirit needs the word Hu\ 
(He). Some he is in need of each hour, like “In the Name of God.” And so on. This 
means  the  repetition  of  verses  arises  from  the  repetition  of  need.  It  makes  the 
repetition in order to point out the need and awaken and excite it, and to arouse desire 
and appetite. 

Moreover,  the  Qur’an  is  a  founder;  it  is  the  basis  of the  Clear  Religion  and the 
foundation of the world of Islam. It transformed human society, and is the answer to 
the repeated questions of its various classes. Repetition is necessary for a founder in 
order  to  establish  things.  It  is  necessary  to  corroborate  them.  Confirmation  and 
repetition are necessary to strengthen them. 

 

243

Furthermore,  it  speaks  of  such mighty  matters  and minute  truths  that  numerous 
repetitions are necessary in different forms to establish them in the hearts of everyone. 
However, they are only apparently repetitions, for each verse has numerous meanings, 
numerous  benefits,  and  many  aspects  and  levels.  Each  place  a  verse  is  found,  it  is 
mentioned for a different meaning, benefit, and purpose. 

Also,  the  Qur’an’s  being  unspecific  and  concise  in  certain  cosmic  matters  is  a 
flash of miraculousness, for the purpose of guidance. It is not a cause of criticism, nor 
a fault, as some atheists imagine. 

 If  you  ask:    “Why  does  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  not  speak  of  beings  in  the  same 
way as philosophy and science? Why does it leave some matters in concise form, and 
speak of others simply and superficially so as to facilitate general understanding, and 
not wound people’s feelings or weary and tax the minds of ordinary people?” 

By way of answer we say:  Philosophy has strayed from the path of truth, that’s 
why.  Also,  of  course  you  have  understood  from  the  previous  Words  and  what  they 
teach  that  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  speaks  of  the  universe  in  order  to  make  known  the 
divine essence, attributes, and names. That is, it explains the meanings of the book of 
the  universe  to  make  known  its  Creator.  That  means  it  looks  at  beings,  not  for 
themselves  but  for  their  Creator.  Also,  it  addresses  everyone, while  philosophy  and 
science  look  at  beings  for  themselves,  and  address  scientists  in  particular.  In  which 
case, since the All-Wise Qur’an makes beings evidences and proofs, the evidence has 
to be superficial so that it will be quickly understood generally. And since the Qur’an 
of Guidance addresses all classes of men, the ordinary people, which form the most 
numerous  class,  want  guidance  which  is  concise  with  unnecessary  things  beings 
vague; in a way that brings subtle things close with comparisons, and does not change 
things  which  in  their  superficial  view  are  obvious,  into  an  unnecessary  or  even 
harmful form, lest it causes them to fall into error. 

For example, it says about the sun: “The sun is a revolving lamp or lantern.” This 
is because it does not speak of the sun for itself and its nature, but because it is a sort 
of mainspring of an order and centre of a system, and order and systems are mirrors of 
the Maker’s skill. It says: 

The sun runs its course.(36:38) 

that  is,  the  sun  revolves.  Through  calling  to  mind  the  orderly  disposals  of  divine 
power  in  the  revolutions  of  winter  and  summer, and  day  and  night  with  the phrase, 
“The sun revolves,” it makes known the Maker’s tremendousness. Thus, whatever the 
reality of this revolving, it does not  

 

244

affect the order, which is woven and observed, and which is the purpose. It also says, 

And set the sun as a lamp.(71:16) 

Here, by depicting with the word “lamp” the world in the  form of a palace, and the 
things within it as decorations, necessities, and provisions prepared for man and living 
beings, and the sun as a subjugated candleholder, it makes known the Creator’s mercy 
and bestowal. Now look and see what this foolish, prattling philosophy says: 

“The  sun  is  a  vast  burning  liquid  mass.  It  causes  the  planets  which  have  been 
flung off from it to revolve around it. Its mass is such-and-such. It is this, it is that.” 
Apart  from  a  terrible  dread  and  fearful  wonder,  philosophy  imparts  to  the  spirit  no 
knowledge  that  will  perfect  it.  It  does  not  speak  of  it as  the  Qur’an  does.  You  may 
understand from this the  value of the matters of  philosophy, whose  inside  is hollow 
and  outside,  ostentatious.  So  do  not  be  deceived  by  its  glittering  exterior  and  be 
disrespectful towards the miraculous expositions of the Qur’an! 

 [NOTE:  The  six  “Drops”  of  the  Fourteenth  Droplet  in  the  Arabic  Risale-i 
Nur, and  especially the six  “Points”  of the  fourth  “Drop,”  explain  fifteen  of 
the  approximately  forty  sorts  of  the  All-Wise  Qur’an’s  miraculousness. 
Deeming  those  to  be  sufficient,  we  have  limited  the  discussion  here.  If  you 
wish, refer to them, and you will find a treasury of miracles.] 

O God! Make the Qur’an healing for us, the writer of this and his peers, for 
all our ills, and a companion to us in our lives and after our deaths, and in 
this world, and in the grave, and at the Last Judgement an intercessor, and 
on the Bridge a light, and from the Fire a screen and shield, and in Paradise 
a friend, and in all good deeds a guide and leader, through Your grace and 
munificence  and  beneficence  and  mercy,  O  Most  Munificent  of  the 
Munificent and Most Merciful of the Merciful! Amen. 
O God! Grant blessings and peace to the one to whom was revealed the All-
Wise Qur’an, the Distinguisher between Truth and Falsehood, and to all his 
Family and Companions. Amen. Amen. 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

                                                                      S  a i d  N u r s i
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

245

About the Miracle of the 
Splitting of the Moon 

 [Addendum to the Nineteenth and Thirty-First Words] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
The  Hour  is nigh, and  the moon  is  split. *  But  if  they  see a  sign,  they  turn 
away, and say: “This is evident magic.”(54:1-2) 

Philosophers  and  their  unreasoning  imitators,  who  want  to  eclipse  with  their 
vicious  delusions  the  Splitting  of  the  Moon,  which  is  a  miracle  of  Muhammad 
(UWBP) that shines like the moon, say: “If the Splitting of the Moon had occurred, it 
would have been known to the whole world and would have been related throughout 
the subsequent history of man.” 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  Since  the  Splitting  of  the  Moon  was  demonstrated  as  an 
evidence  of  prophethood,  and  happened  instantaneously  at  night  when  people  were 
asleep, and before a gathering who, although they witnessed such an evidence, denied 
it; and since there were obstacles hindering the sighting of it such as mist, clouds, and 
time-differences  between  different parts of  the  world;  and  since  at  that  time  science 
and civilization were  not widespread, and observation of the  skies was  very  limited, 
and the event itself was exceptional, there was, therefore, nothing to necessitate that it 
should have been seen all over the world and been recorded in the general histories.1 
For  now,  listen  to  five  points  out of  many  that will  scatter  those  clouds of  delusion 
concerning the Splitting of the Moon.  

F i r s t  P o i n t : The extreme stubbornness of the unbelievers there at that time 
is  well-known  and  is  recorded  in  history.  And  yet,  when  the  All-Wise  Qur’an 
announced  this  event  to  the  whole  world  through  saying:  “And  the  moon  is 
split,”(54:1)  not one  of  those  unbelievers,  who  denied  the  Qur’an,  spoke up  to  give 
the lie to this verse; that is, not one of them denied the event it was announcing. If the 
event had not been considered a  

                                                 
1 See, al-Nawawi, Sharh al-Sahih Muslim, xvii, 143; Ibn Qutayba, Ta’wil Mukhtalif al-Hadith, i, 21-5. 

245

 

 

246

definite fact by the unbelievers, they would have  made the verse a pretext, denied it 
strenuously,  and  tried  to  attack  and  nullify  Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  claim  to 
prophethood.  However,  the  biographies  of  the  Prophet  (UWBP)  and  histories 
mentioning the event relate nothing to suggest that the unbelievers denied it. The only 
thing  that  history  relates  is,  as  the  verse  “And  [they]  say,  ‘This  is  evident 
magic’”(54:2) points out, the unbelievers who saw the event declared it to be magic, 
and said that if the caravans in other places had seen it, it was true, otherwise he had 
bewitched  them.  The  caravans  arriving  the  following  morning  from  the  Yemen  and 
other places announced that they had seen such a happening. So the unbelievers said 
of  the  Pride  of  All  the  Worlds  (UWBP)  that,  God  forbid,  the  magic  of  Abu  Talib’s 
orphan had affected the heavens.2 

S e c o n d  P o i n t : The majority of the most illustrious scholars, like Sa‘d al-
din  Taftazani,  declared  that  like  the  Prophet  (UWBP)  had  satisfied  the  thirst  of  a 
whole  army  with  water  flowing  from  his  fingers,  and  the  whole  congregation  had 
heard a dry wooden post against which he had leant while delivering the sermon weep 
on  being  separated  from  him,  the  Splitting  of  the  Moon  had  been  transmitted  by 
numerous authorities.3 That is to say, these events had been passed down from group 
to group forming such a  vast congregation that a conspiracy to lie would have been 
impossible. Like the appearance of the  famous Haley’s  Comet a thousand  years ago 
had been unanimously reported, and the existence of the island of Ceylon was certain 
because of the unanimous reports concerning it, although we had not seen it. 

It  is  therefore  unreasonable  to  foster  baseless  doubts  about  such  certain, 
witnessed matters. It is enough that they are not impossible. And as for the Splitting 
of the Moon, it is quite as possible as a mountain’s splitting with a volcanic eruption. 

T  h  i  r  d    P  o  i  n  t  :  Miracles  are  for  proving  claims  to  prophethood  and  for 
convincing  those  who  deny  such  claims,  they  are  not  for  compelling  people  to 
believe. They have therefore to be shown to those who hear such claims to an extent 
that  will  persuade  them.  It  would  be  contrary  to  the  All-Wise  and  Glorious  One’s 
wisdom  to  display  them  all  over  the  world  or  in  so  self-evident  a  manner  that 
everyone would be compelled to believe. It  

                                                 
2 Tirmidhi, Tafsir al-Qur’an, 54; Musnad, iii, 165; al-Tabari, Jami’ al-Bayan, xxvii, 84-5; al-Qurtubi, 
al-Jami’ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, xvii, 126; al-Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, ii, 268. 
3 al-Iji, Kitab al-Mawaqif, iii, 405-6; al-Amidi, Ghayat al-Maram, i, 365; Ibn Taymiya, al-Jawab al-
Sahih, i, 414; ii, 44; al-Shahristani, al-Farq bayn al-Firaq, i, 313; al-Taftazani, Sharh al-Maqasid, v, 
17. 

246

 

 

247

would  also  be  contrary  to  the  mystery  of  man’s  accountability.  For  this  requires 
“opening the door to the reason without cancelling the power of choice.” If the All-
Wise Creator had left the moon split apart for a couple of hours so as to show it to the 
whole world as the philosophers wished, and it  had been recorded in all the  general 
histories of mankind, then it would have been like all other occurrences in the heavens 
and  would  not  have  been  an  evidence  for  Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  claim  to 
prophethood,  nor  been  special  to  it.  Or  else  it  would  have  been  so  self-evident  a 
miracle that it would have annulled the reason’s power to choose, and compelled it to 
accept it; it would have had to assent to his prophethood. People with coal-like spirits 
like  Abu  Jahl  would  have  remained  on  the  same  level  as  people  with  diamond-like 
spirits like Abu Bakr the Veracious; the mystery of man’s accountability would have 
been lost. It was due to this mystery that, being both instantaneous, and at nighttime, 
and at a time of sleep; and due to time differences, mist, and cloud and other factors 
concealing it, it was not shown to the whole world and did not pass into the histories. 

F o u r t h  P o i n t : Since this event occurred instantaneously at  night while 
everyone  was  sleeping,  of  course  it  was  not  seen  all  over  the  world.  Even  if  some 
people had seen it, they would not have believed their eyes. And if it had made them 
believe,  such  a  significant  event  would  not  have  become  lasting  material  for  future 
histories due to isolated individual reports. 

In  some  books  it  is  written  that  after  the  moon  split  into  two  halves,  it  fell  to 
earth,  but  veracious  scholars  have  rejected  such  additions,  saying  that  they  were 
perhaps added by dissemblers with the  intention of disparaging this evident miracle, 
and depreciating it.4 

Also,  in  England  and  Spain,  which  were  then  enveloped  in  mists  of  ignorance, 
the time it occurred would have been just after sunset, in America it would have been 
daytime,  and  in  China  and Japan,  morning.  Elsewhere  there  would  have  been  other 
obstacles  preventing  it  from  being  seen.  Now  consider  those  unreasoning  objectors 
who  say  that  the  histories  of  peoples  like  the  English,  Chinese,  Japanese,  and 
Americans do not mention it, and that therefore it did not occur. A thousand curses be 
on the heads of those who toady to Europe and repeat such things. 

F i f t h  P o i n t : The Splitting of the Moon happened neither of its own accord 
due to certain causes, nor as a result of chance, nor was it a natural event that occurred 
through the ordinary laws of nature. It was rather  

                                                 
4 See, al-Wadi’i, al-Mu’alla, i, 80; Darwish al-H\t, Athna’ al-Matalib, i, 378, 1606; al-Madani, Tahdhir 
al-Muslimin, i, 163; ‘Ali al-Qari, al-Asrar al-Marfu’a, 398. 

247

 

 

248

something  out of the  ordinary  which  the All-Wise  Creator of  the  sun  and  the  moon 
caused  to  happen  in  order  to  confirm  His  Messenger’s  messengership  and  to 
illuminate his claim. 

As  required  by  the  mysteries  of  guidance  and  human  responsibility  and  the 
wisdom of prophethood, it was  shown as a convincing proof to a number of people 
specified  by  dominical  wisdom.  The  mystery  of  wisdom  required  that  it  was  not 
shown to people in every region of the world, who had not yet heard of Muhammad’s 
(UWBP) claim to prophethood. Numerous obstacles prevented them, therefore, such 
as mist, cloud, and time-differences, and the fact that in some countries the moon had 
not risen, and in others the sun had risen, while in others it was morning, and in  yet 
others the sun had just set. 

If  it  had  been  shown  to  all  and  sundry,  it  would have  been  shown as  a sign  of 
Muhammad  (UWBP)  and  a  miracle  of  his  prophethood,  in  which  case  his 
messengership would have been so obvious that everyone would have been compelled 
to affirm it. Human reason and will would have been cancelled, and belief is attained 
through  the  faculties  of  reason  and  will.  Human  responsibility  and  accountability 
would  have  been  nullified.  If  it  had  been  shown  merely  as  an  occurrence  in  the 
heavens, its connection with Muhammad’s (UWBP) messengership would have been 
cut, and there would have  been nothing about it that pertained to him. 

To  Conclude:    No  doubt remains  concerning  the  possibility  of  the  Splitting  of 
the  Moon;  it  has  been  proved  decisively.  Now  we  shall  mention  six5  of  the  many 
evidences pointing to its occurrence. 

The  concurrence  of  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  Companions,  who  were  all  men  of 

justice, on its occurrence.6 

of the verse, “And the moon is split.” 

The agreement of all exacting commentators on the Qur’an in their explanations 

The  fact  that,  relying  on  numerous  different  chains  of  authorities  and  lines  of 
transmission, all the scholars of the prophetic traditions and transmitters of the sound 
narrations narrated the event.7 

                                                 
5 That is to say, there are six proofs concerning the event in the form of a sixfold consensus. 
Unfortunately, the explanation of them is brief and they deserve more. 
6 See, al-Wahidi, al-Wajiz fi Tafsir al-Kitab al-‘Aziz, i, 370; al-Tabari, Jami’ al-Bayan, 2784-7; al-
Qurtubi, al-Jami’ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, xvii, 126-7; al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur, vii, 672. 
7 Line of ‘Abdullah b. Mas’ud: Bukhari, Tafsir,(54:)1; Muslim, Sifat al-Munafiqin, 44-5; Tirmidhi, 
Tafsir, 54. Line of ‘Abdullah b. ‘Umar: Muslim, Sifat al-Munafiqin,45, 48; Tirmidhi, Tafsir, 54:1. Line 
of ‘Abdullah b. ‘Abbas: Bukhari, Manaqib, 27; Manaqib al-Ansar, 36; Tafsir (54:)1; Muslim, Sifat al-
Munafiqin, 48. Line of Anas b. Malik: Bukhari, Manaqib, 27; Manaqib al-Ansar, 36; Tafsir (54:)1; 
Muslim, Sifat al-Munafiqin,48; Tirmidhi, Tafsir Sura 54. Line of Khuzayfa ibn al-Yaman: al-Tabari, 
Jami’ al-Bayan, xxvii, 51; ‘Abd al-Razzaq, al-Musannaf,  iii, 193-4; Abu Nu’aym, Hilyat al-Awliya’, i, 
280-1. Line of Jubayr b. Mut’im: Tirmidhi, Tafsir Sura 54; Musnad, iv, 82; Ibn  Hibban, al-Sahih, xiv, 
422. 

248

 

 

249

The testimony of all the saints and the veracious, those who receive inspiration, 

and uncover the mysteries of the creation. 

The confirmation of learned scholars and theologians, whose ways differ greatly 

from one another. 

The fact that Muhammad’s (UWBP) Community accepted its occurrence, which, 

on an established principle, never agrees upon error.8 

These six evidences prove the Splitting of the Moon as clearly as the sun. 

Conclusion 

Up to  here  this  Addendum  has  aimed  to  establish  the  truth  and  to  silence  those 
enemies who deny it. The following sentences speak in the name of the truth and for 
the sake of belief.  In the former, establishing the truth spoke; now the truth speaks: 

The  Seal  of  the  Office  of  Prophethood,  who  was  the  luminous  moon  of  the 
heavens  of  messengership,  proved  his  sainthood  through  his  Ascension.  It  was  his 
greatest wonder and the supreme miracle of sainthood, achieved through his worship, 
which  was  so  elevated as  to make  him  God’s  beloved.  That  is  to  say, by  travelling 
with  his  earthly  body  through  the  heavens,  his  superiority  and  his  being  God’s 
beloved were demonstrated to the dwellers of the heavens and inhabitants of the lofty 
worlds. So too, through the moon, which is bound to the earth and suspended in the 
heavens,  being  split  into  two  halves  at  the  sign  of  an  earth  dweller,  it  displayed  a 
miracle  to  the  other  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  which  indicated  the  former’s 
messengership.  Thus,  the  person  of  Muhammad  (UWBP)  flew  to  the  peak  of 
perfections on the two luminous wings of messengership and sainthood – like the two 
luminous  unfolded  wings  of  the  moon;  he  ascended  to  the  distance  of  two  bow-
lengths;  he  became  the  cause  of  pride  of  the  dwellers  of  both  the  heavens  and  the 
earth. 

Upon him and upon his Family be blessings and peace such as will fill the 
earth and the heavens. 
Glory be unto You! we have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise. 

                                                 
8  Abu Da’ud, Fitan wa Malahim, 1; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 7; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 7. 

249

 

 

250

The Third Addendum 
to The Miracles of Muhammad (UWBP) 

[This is about the Messengership of Muhammad (UWBP) and is the answer, 
in concise index-like form, to the first of the three questions and difficulties 
in the Third Principle of the Thirty-First Word, about his Ascension.] 

Q u e s t i o n : Why is this mighty Ascension special to Muhammad the Arabian 

(Upon whom be blessings and peace)? 

T h e  A n s w e r to your first difficulty: It has been analysed in detail in the first 
thirty Words, so here we shall set out a concise list briefly alluding to the perfections 
of Muhammad (UWBP), to the signs of his prophethood, and to the fact that he was 
the most worthy to make the Ascension. It is as follows. 

Firstly: Despite numerous corruptions in the texts of such Holy Scriptures as the 
Torah,  Gospels,  and  Psalms,  in  recent  times  even,  an  exacting  scholar  like  Husain 
Jisri  found  one  hundred  and  fourteen  allusions 
to  Muhammad’s  (UWBP) 
prophethood; these good tidings he set forth in his Risale-i Hamidiye.1 

Secondly:  It  has  been  proved  historically  that  there  were  many  predictions 
accurately  forecasting  Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  prophethood,  like  those  of  the  two 
soothsayers Shiqq and Satih, which, a while previously to it, gave news of it and the 
fact that he was to be the prophet of the end of time.2 

Thirdly:  There  were  hundreds  of  extraordinary  happenings,  famous  in  history, 
called irhasat, that is, signs forewarning men of a coming prophet. Among them were 
the idols in the Ka‘ba falling from their places on the night of Muhammad’s (UWBP) 
birth,3 and the famous palace of Chosroes the Persian being rent asunder.4 

Fourthly: History and the Prophet’s (UWBP) biographies show that he  

                                                 
1 Husain Jisrî, Risâle-i Hamidiye (Turk. trans.), 52-94. 
2 Ibn Hisham, al-Sirat al-Nabawiyya, i, 124-7, 158, 190, 192; al-Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 126-
30; Abu  Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 122-8. 
3 al-Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 19; al-Suyuti, al-Khasa’is al-Kubra, i, 81. 
4 al-Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 19, 126; Abu Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 139. 

250

 

 

251

satisfied  the  thirst  of  an  army  with  water  flowing  from  his  fingers,5  that  in  the 
presence  of  a  large  congregation  in  the  mosque,  the  dry  wooden  support  against 
which  he  (UWBP)  used  to  lean  moaned  like  a  camel  and  wept  on  being  separated 
from him when  he mounted the pulpit,6 and that  he was distinguished by close on a 
thousand  miracles  attested  to  by  such  verses  of  the  Qur’an  as,  “And  the  moon 
split,”(54:1)  referring  to  the  splitting  of  the  moon,7  and  verified  by  those  who 
investigated them. 

Fifthly:  Anyone  who  considers  the  facts  and  is  fair  and  just  cannot  hesitate  to 
agree  that,  as  is  unanimously  agreed  by  friend  and  foe  alike,  good  moral  qualities 
were to be found at the highest degree in his person, and that, in accordance with the 
testimony  of  all  his  dealings  and  actions,  attributes  and  character  of  the  loftiest 
excellence  were  apparent  in  the way  he  performed  his duties  and  proclaimed  Islam. 
And  in  accordance  with  the  fine  qualities  and  conduct  enjoined  by  the  religion  of 
Islam, laudable virtues of the highest order were to be found in the law he brought. 

Sixthly:  As  is  alluded  to  in  the  Second  Indication  of  the  Tenth  Word,  it  is  a 
requirement  of  wisdom  that  the  Godhead  be  manifested.  And  this  desire  to  be 
manifested  is  met  at  the  widest  level  and  in  the  most  brilliant  fashion  by  the 
comprehensive  worship  performed  by  Muhammad  (UWBP)  in  the  practice  of  his 
religion.  Also,  wisdom  and  truth  require  that  the  Creator  of  the  world  displays  His 
beauty  in  its  utter  perfection  through  some  means.  And  the  one  who  met  that  wish, 
and displayed and described the Creator’s beauty in the most perfect fashion was self-
evidently the person of Muhammad (UWBP). 

It  was  also  clearly  Muhammad  (UWBP)  who,  in  response  to  the  desire  of  the 
world’s Maker to exhibit His perfect art and infinite beauty and attract attentive gazes 
towards them, heralded them with the loudest voice. 

Again it was necessarily Muhammad (UWBP) who, in response to the desire of 
the  Sustainer  of  All  the  Worlds  to  proclaim  His  unity  in  the  levels  of  multiplicity, 
announced all the degrees of unity, each at its highest level. 

And,  as  is  indicated  by  the  utter  beauty  of  beings  and  is  required  by  truth  and 
wisdom, the world’s Owner desires to see His infinite essential beauty and the subtle 
qualities  of  His  exquisiteness  and  to  display  them  in  mirrors.  Again  it  was  self-
evidently Muhammad (UWBP) who in response to that desire acted as a mirror and 
displayed that beauty most radiantly, and loved it and made others love it. 

                                                 
5  Bukhari, Wudu’, 32, 46; Manaqib, 25; Ashriba, 31; Muslim, Zuhd, 74; Fada’il, 4-6; Tirmidhi, 
Manaqib, 6. 
6  Bukhari, Manaqib, 25; Jum’a, 26; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; Jum^a, 10; Nasa’i, 17. 
7 .Bukhari, Manaqib, 27; Manaqib al-Ansar, 36; Tafsir, 54:1; Muslim, Sifat al-Munafiqin, 43-8. 

251

 

 

252

And, in response to the desire of the Maker of the palace of this world to exhibit 
His hidden treasuries, filled as they are with wondrous miracles and priceless jewels, 
and  through  them  to  describe  and  make  known  His  perfections,  it  was  again  self-
evidently Muhammad (UWBP) who exhibited, described, and displayed them  in the 
most comprehensively. 

And,  since  the  Maker  of  the  universe  adorns  it  with  various  wonders  and 
embellishments  and  has  included  conscious  creatures  in  it  so  that  they  might  make 
tours  and  excursions  and  ponder  over  it  and  take  lessons,  wisdom  requires  that  He 
should desire to make known the meanings and value of those works of art to those 
who will observe and ponder over them. And it was again self-evidently Muhammad 
(UWBP) who, in response to this desire of the universe’s Maker, by means of the All-
Wise Qur’an, acted as guide in the most comprehensive fashion to jinn and man, and 
to spirit beings and angels. 

Also, the All-Wise Ruler of the universe wishes, by means of an envoy, to cause 
conscious beings to unravel the obscure talisman  containing the aim and purpose of 
the  change  and  transformations  in  the  universe  and  to  solve  the  riddle  of  the  three 
perplexing questions: “Where do beings come from?”, “Where are they going?”, and 
“What  are  they?”  And  again  it  was  self-evidently  Muhammad  (UWBP)  who  in 
response  to  this  wish  of  the  All-Wise  Ruler  unravelled  the  talisman  and  solved  the 
riddle by means of the truths of the Qur’an, in the clearest and most comprehensive 
fashion. 

Also, the All-Glorious Maker of the universe desires to make Himself known to 
conscious beings by means of His fine artefacts and to make them love Him through 
all His precious bounties, and, most certainly, to make known to them by means of an 
envoy the divine wishes and what will please  Him in return for those bounties. And 
again it was self-evidently Muhammad (UWBP) who, in response to this desire of the 
All-Glorious Maker, by means of the Qur’an, expounded those wishes and things that 
please Him by word and deed in the most exalted and perfect fashion. 

Also, since the Sustainer of All the Worlds has given to man, who is the fruit of 
the  universe,  a  comprehensive  disposition  which  encompasses  the  universe  and  has 
prepared him for universal worship; and since, because of man’s faculties and senses, 
multiplicity  and  the  world  afflict  him;  the  Sustainer  desires  to  turn  his  face  from 
multiplicity to unity, from transience to permanence. And again it was self-evidently 
Muhammad (UWBP) who, in response to this desire, by means of the Qur’an, acted 
as  guide in the most comprehensive and complete fashion, and in the best way, and 
carried out the duty of prophethood in the most perfect manner. 

 

 

252

253

Thus,  among  beings  the  most  superior  are  animate  beings,  and  among  animate 
beings the most superior are conscious beings, and among conscious beings the most 
superior  are  true  human  beings,  and  among  true  human  beings  the  one who  carried 
out  the  above-mentioned  duties  at  the  most  comprehensive  level  and  in  the  most 
perfect  form,  would  of  a  certainty  rise  through  an  all-embracing  Ascension  to  “the 
distance  of  two  bow-lengths,”  knock  at  the  door  of  eternal  happiness,  open  the 
treasury of mercy, and see the hidden truths of belief. Again it would be him. 

Seventhly:  As  is  plain  to  see,  beings  are  made  beautiful  with  the  very  finest 
embellishment. This demonstrates that their Maker possesses a powerful will to make 
beautiful and intention to adorn. And this shows that the Maker necessarily possesses 
a strong desire and  holy  love towards His art. And among beings  it was again most 
certainly  he who displayed altogether in  himself the most comprehensive and subtle 
wonders of  art,  and  knew  them  and  made  them  known  and  himself  loved,  and  who 
appreciated the beauties to be found in other beings, declaring: “What wonders God 
has willed!”, and was most beloved in the sight of his Maker, who nurtures and loves 
His art. 

Thus,  it  was  again  self-evidently  he  (UWBP)  who,  declaring:  “All  glory  be  to 
God! What wonders God has willed! God is most Great!” in the face of the exquisite 
qualities  that  gild  beings  and  the  subtle  perfections  that  illuminate  them, causes the 
heavens to ring out, and who, through the strains of the Qur’an, causes the universe to 
reverberate,  and  through  his  admiration  and  appreciation,  his  contemplation  and 
display,  his  mentioning  of  the  divine  names  and  affirmation  of  divine  unity,  brings 
land and sea to a state of ecstasy. 

Thus, in accordance with the saying “the cause is like the doer,”8 it is pure truth 
and sheer wisdom that the one on whose scales shall be found the equivalent of all the 
good  deeds  performed  by  his  community,  and  whose  spiritual  perfections  draw 
strength  from  the  benedictions  of  all  his  community,9  and  who,  as  a  result  of  the 
duties  he  discharged  in  his  prophethood,  received  immaterial  recompense  and 
boundless  emanations  of  divine  mercy  and love,  should  advance by  the  stairway  of 
the  Ascension  as  far  as  Paradise,  “the  Lote-tree  of  the  farthest  limit,”  the  divine 
throne, and “the distance of two bow-lengths.”(53:1-18) 

                                                 
8 This resembles the Hadith “Whoever points out an instance of good [to someone] will receive the 
same recompense as the one who performs it.” See,  Tirmidhi, ‘Ilm, 14; Musnad, v, 357; Abu Hanifa, 
al-Musnad, i, 151. 
9 See, Qur’an, 33:56; Bukhari, Adhan, 8; Tafsir (17:)11: Muslim, Salat, 14; Abu Da’ud, Salat, 37. 

253

 

 

254

The Fourth Addendum 
to The Miracles of Muhammad (UWBP) 

 [The Sixteenth Degree, on the Messengership of Muhammad 
(UWBP),  from The Supreme Sign.] 

Then that traveller through the world addressed his own intellect saying: “Since I 
am seeking my Master and Creator by means of the creatures of the cosmos, I ought 
before all else to visit the most celebrated of all these creatures, the greatest and most 
accomplished  commander  among  them,  according  to  the  testimony  even  of  his 
enemies, the most renowned ruler, the most exalted in speech and the most brilliant an 
intellect,  who  has  illuminated  fourteen  centuries  with  his  excellence  and  with  his 
Qur’an,  Muhammad  the  Arabian  Prophet  (May  God’s  peace  and  blessings  be  upon 
him).” In order thus to visit him and seek from him the answer to his quest, he entered 
the blessed age of the Prophet (UWBP) in his mind, and saw that age to be one of true 
felicity, thanks to that being. For through the light he had brought, he had turned the 
most primitive and illiterate of peoples into the masters and teachers of the world.  

He said too to his own intellect, “Before asking him concerning our Creator, we 
should first learn the value of this extraordinary being, the veracity of his words and 
the truthfulness of  his warnings.” Thus he began investigating, and of the  numerous 
conclusive  proofs  that  he  found  we  will  briefly  indicate  here  only  nine  of  the  most 
general ones. 

T h e  F i r s t : All excellent qualities and characteristics were to be found in that 
extraordinary  being,  according  to  the  testimony  even  of  his  enemies.  Hundreds  of 
miracles  were  made  manifest  at  his  hands,  according  to  explicit  Qur’anic  verses  or 
traditions enjoying the status of tawatur.1 Examples of these miracles are his splitting 
of  the  moon, “And  the  moon  split,”(54:1)  with  a  single  indication  of  his  finger;  his 
casting of a handful of dust into the eyes of his enemies, causing them to flee, “It was 
not your act  

                                                 
1 Tawatur is the kind of report that is transmitted by numerous authorities, about which there is 
consensus, and no room for doubt. (Tr.) 

254

 

 

255

when you threw, but God’s,”(8:17) and his giving his thirsting army to drink from the 
water that flowed forth from his five fingers like the Spring of Kawthar. Since some 
of  those  miracles,  numbering  more  than  three  hundred,  have  been  set  forth  with 
decisive  proofs  in  the  remarkable  and  wondrous  work  known  as  The  Miracles  of 
Muhammad (the Nineteenth Letter), we leave discussion of the miracles to that book, 
and permit the traveller to continue speaking: 

“A  being  who  in  addition  to  noble  characteristics  and  perfections  has  all  these 
luminous miracles to demonstrate, must certainly be the most truthful in speech of all 
men. It  is  inconceivable that he would stoop to trickery,  lies  and error, the deeds of 
the vile.” 

T h e  S e c o n d : He holds in his hand a decree from the Lord of the universe, a 
decree  accepted  and  affirmed  in  each  century  by  more  than  three  hundred  million 
people.  This  decree,  the  Qur’an  of  Mighty  Stature,  is  wondrous  in  seven  different 
ways. The fact that the Qur’an has forty different aspects of miraculousnes and that it 
is the word of the Creator of all beings has been set forth in detail with strong proofs 
in  the  Twenty-Fifth  Word,  The  Miraculousness  of  the  Qur’an,  a  celebrated  treatise 
that is like the sun of the Risale-i Nur. We therefore leave such matters to that work 
and listen to the traveller as he says, “There can never be any possibility of lying on 
the part of the being who is the conveyor and proclaimer of this decree, for that would 
be a violation of the decree and treachery toward the One who issued it.” 

T  h  e    T  h  i  r d  : Such a  Sacred  Law,  an  Islam,  a  code  of worship,  a  cause,  a 
summons, and a faith did that being bring  forth that the  like of them does not exist, 
nor could it exist. Nor does a more perfect form of them exist, nor could it exist. For 
the Law appearing with that unlettered being has no rival in its administration of one 
fifth  of  humanity  for  fourteen  centuries,  in  a  just  and  precise  manner  through  its 
numerous injunctions. Moreover the Islam that emerged from the deeds, sayings, and 
inward states of that unlettered being has no peer, nor can it have, for in each century 
it  has  been  for  three  hundred  million  men  a  guide  and  a  refuge,  the  teacher  and 
educator of  their  intellects  and  the  illuminator  and purifier  of  their  hearts,  the  cause 
for  the  refinement  and  training  of  their  souls,  and  the  source  of  progress  and 
advancement of their spirits. 

The  Prophet  (UWBP)  is  similarly  unparalleled  in  the  way  in  which  he  was  the 
foremost in practising all the forms of worship found in his religion, and the first  in 
piety  and  the  fear  of  God;  in  his  observing  the  duties  of  worship  fully  and  with 
attention  to  their  profoundest  dimensions,  even  while  engaged  in  constant  struggle 
and activity; in his practice of worship  

 

 

255

256

combining in perfect fashion the beginning and end of worship and servitude of God 
without imitation of anyone. 

With  the  Jaushan  al-Kabir,  from  among  his  thousands  of  supplicatory  prayers 
and  invocations,  he describes his Sustainer with such a degree of  gnosis that all the 
gnostics  and  saints  who  have  come  after  him  have  been  unable,  with  their  joint 
efforts, to attain a similar degree of gnosis and accurate description. This shows that 
in prayer too he is without peer. Whoever looks at the section at the beginning of the 
Treatise on Supplicatory Prayer, which sets forth some part of the meaning of one of 
the ninety-nine sections of the Jaushan al-Kabir, will say that the Jaushan too has no 
peer. 

In  his  conveying  of  the  message  and  his  summoning  men  to  the  truth,  he 
displayed  such  steadfastness,  firmness  and  courage  that  although  great  states  and 
religions, and even  his own people, tribe and uncle opposed him in the most  hostile 
fashion, he exhibited not the slightest trace of hesitation, anxiety or fear. The fact that 
he successfully challenged the whole world and made Islam the master of the world 
likewise proves that there  is  not and cannot be anyone like him  in  his conveying of 
the message and summons. 

In  his  faith,  he  had  so  extraordinary  a  strength,  so  marvellous  a  certainty,  so 
miraculous  a  breadth,  and  so  exalted  a  conviction,  illumining the  whole  world,  that 
none of the ideas and beliefs then dominating the world, and none of the philosophies 
of the sages and teachings of the religious leaders, was able, despite extreme hostility 
and  denial,  to  induce  in  his  certainty,  conviction,  trust  and  assurance,  the  slightest 
doubt,  hesitation,  weakness  or  anxiety.  Moreover,  the  saintly  of  all  ages,  headed by 
the Companions, the foremost in the degrees of belief, have all drawn on his fountain 
of belief and regarded him as representing the highest degree of faith. This proves that 
his  faith  too  is  matchless.  Our  traveller  therefore  concluded,  and  affirmed  with  his 
intellect,  that  lying  and  duplicity  have  no  place  in  the  one  who  has  brought  such  a 
unique sacred law, such an unparalleled Islam, such a wondrous devotion to worship, 
such an extraordinary excellence in supplicatory prayer, such a universally acclaimed 
summons to the truth and such a miraculous faith. 

T h e  F o u r t h : In the same way that the consensus of the prophets is a strong 
proof  for  the  existence  and  unity  of  God,  so  too  it  is  a  firm  testimony  to  the 
truthfulness  and  messengerhood of  this  being.  For all the  sacred  attributes,  miracles 
and functions that indicate the truthfulness and messengerhood of the prophets (Upon 
whom  be peace)  existed  in  full  measure  in  that  being  according  to  the  testimony  of 
history.  The  prophets  have  verbally  predicted  the  coming  of  that  being  and  given 
good tidings  

 

 

256

257

thereof in the Torah, the Gospels, the Psalms, and other scriptures; more than twenty 
of the most conclusive examples of these glad tidings, drawn from the scriptures, have 
been  set  forth  and  proven  in  the  Nineteenth  Letter.  Similarly,  through  all  the  deeds 
and miracles associated with their prophethood they have affirmed and – as it were – 
put their signature to the mission of that being which is the foremost and most perfect 
in  the  tasks  and  functions  of  prophethood.  Just  as  through  verbal  consensus  they 
indicate the divine unity, through the unanimity of their deeds they bear witness to the 
truthfulness of that being. This too was understood by our traveller. 

T  h  e    F  i  f  t  h  :  Similarly,  the  thousands  of  saints  who  have  attained  truth, 
reality, perfection, wondrous deeds, unveiling and witnessing through the instruction 
of this being and following him, bear unanimous witness not only to the divine unity 
but also to the truthfulness and messengerhood of this being. Again, the fact that they 
witness, through the light of sainthood, some of the truths he proclaimed concerning 
the  World  of  the  Unseen,  and  that  they  believe  in  and  affirm  all  of  those  truths 
through the light of belief, either with ‘knowledge of certainty,’ or with the ‘vision of 
certainty,’ or with ‘absolute certainty.’  He saw that this too demonstates like the sun 
the degree of truthfulness and rectitude of that great being, their master. 

T h e  S i x t h : The millions of purified, sincere, and punctilious scholars and 
faithful sages, who have reached the highest station of learning through the teaching 
and  instruction  contained  in  the  sacred  truths  brought  by  that  being,  despite  his 
unlettered  nature,  the  exalted  sciences  he  invented  and  divine  knowledge  he 
discovered  –  they  not  only  prove  and  affirm,  unanimously  and  with  the  strongest 
proofs,  the  divine  unity  which  is  the  foundation  of  his  mission,  but  also  bear 
unanimous witness to the truthfulness of this supreme teacher and great master, and to 
the  veracity  of  his  words. This  is  a  proof  as  clear  as  daylight.  The  Risale-i  Nur  too 
with its one hundred parts is but a single proof of his truthfulness. 

T h e  S e v e n t h : The Family and Companions of the Prophet – who with their 
insight,  knowledge,  and  spiritual  accomplishment  are  the  most  renowned,  the  most 
respected, the most celebrated, the most pious and the most keensighted of men after 
the  prophets  –  examined  and  scrutinized,  with  the  utmost  attention,  seriousness  and 
exactitude,  all  the  states,  thoughts  and  conditions  of  this  being,  whether  hidden  or 
open. They came to the unanimous conclusion that he was the most truthful, exalted, 
and honest being in the world, and this, their unshakeable affirmation and firm belief, 
is a proof like the daylight attesting the reality of the sun. 

 

 

257

258

T h e  E i g h t h : The cosmos indicates its Maker, Inscriber, and Designer, who 
creates,  administers,  and  arranges  it,  and  through  determining  its  measure  and  form 
and regulating it, has disposal over it as though it was a palace, a book, an exhibition, 
a spectacle. And so too it indicates that it requires and necessitates an elevated herald, 
a truthful unveiler, a learned master, and a truthful teacher who will know and make 
known the divine purposes in the universe’s creation, teach the dominical instances of 
wisdom in its changes and transformations, give instruction in the results of its dutiful 
motions, proclaim its essential  value and the perfections of the beings within  it, and 
express the meanings of that mighty book; it indicates that he is certain to exist. Thus, 
the  traveller  knew  that  it  testified  to  the  truthfulness  of  this  being,  who  performed 
these functions better than anyone, and to his being a most elevated and loyal official 
of the universe’s Creator. 

T h e  N i n t h : There is behind the veil One who wishes to demonstrate with 
these  ingenious  and  wise  artefacts  the  perfection  of  His  talent  and  art;  to  make 
Himself  known  and  loved  by  means  of  these  countless  adorned  and  decorated 
creations;  to  evoke  praise  and  thanks  through  the  unnumbered  pleasurable  and 
valuable  bounties  that  he  bestows;  to  cause  men  to  worship  Him  with  gratitude  and 
appreciation  in  the  face  of  His  dominicality,  through  His  solicitous  and  protective 
sustenance  of  life,  and  His  provision  of  nurture  and  bounty  in  such  manner  as  to 
satisfy the most delicate of tastes and appetites; to manifest His Godhead through the 
change of seasons, the alternation of night and day, and through all His magnificent 
and majestic deeds, all His awe-inspiring and wise acts and creativity, and thereby to 
cause men to believe in his Godhead, in submission, humility and obedience; and to 
demonstrate  His  justice  and  truthfulness  by  at  all  times  protecting  virtue  and  the 
virtuous and destroying evil and the evil, by annihilating with blows from heaven the 
oppressor  and  the  liar.  There  will  of  a  certainty  be  at  the  side  of  this  Unseen  Being 
His  most  beloved  creature  and  most  devoted  bondsman,  who,  serving  the  purposes 
that  have  just been mentioned, discovers and unravels the talisman and riddle of the 
creation of the universe, who acts always in the name of that Creator, who seeks aid 
and success  from Him, and who receives them from Him – Muhammad of Quraysh 
(Peace and blessings be upon him!) 

The  traveller  further  said, addressing  his  own  intellect:  “Since  these  nine  truths 
bear  witness  to  the  truthfulness  of  this  being,  he  must  be  the  source  of  glory  of 
mankind and the source of honour for the world. If we therefore call him the Pride of 
the World and Glory of the Sons of Adam, it will be fitting. The fact that the awesome 
sovereignty of that decree of the  

 

 

258

259

Compassionate One, the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition that  he  holds in his  hand, 
has  conquered  half  the  world,  together  with  his  individual  perfections  and  exalted 
virtues,  shows  that  he  is  the  most  important  personage  in  the  world.  The  most 
important word concerning our Creator is that which he utters.” 

Now see: the foundation of the summons of this extraordinary being and the aim 
of all his life, based on the strength furnished by his hundreds of decisive and evident 
and manifest miracles, and the thousands of exalted, fundamental truths contained in 
his religion, was to prove and bear witness to the existence of the Necessary Existent, 
His  unity,  attributes  and  names,  to  affirm,  proclaim  and  announce  Him.  He  is 
therefore like a sun in the cosmos, the most brilliant proof of our Creator, this being 
whom  we  call  the  Beloved  of  God.  There  are  three  forms  of  great  and  infallible 
consensus  each  of  which  affirms,  confirms,  and  puts  its  signature  to  the  witness  he 
bears. 

The  First:  the  unanimous  affirmation  made  by  that  luminous  assembly  known 
and  celebrated  throughout  the  world  as  the  Family  of  Muhammad  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings and peace) including thousands of poles and supreme saints of penetrating 
gaze and ability to perceive the  Unseen, such  Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with 
him),  who  said,  “Were  the  veil  to  be  lifted,  my  certainty  would  not  increase,”2  and 
‘Abd al-Qadir al-Gilani, the Ghauth al-A‘zam (May  his mystery be  sanctified), who 
saw the Supreme Throne and the awesome form of Israfil while yet on the earth.3 

The  Second:  the  confirmation  made  with  a  strong  faith  that  permitted  men  to 
sacrifice  their  lives  and  their  property,  their  fathers  and  tribes,  by  the  renowned 
assembly known as the Companions, who found themselves among a primitive people 
and  in  an  unlettered  environment,  devoid  of  all  social  life  and  political  thought, 
without any scripture and lost in the darkness of a period between prophets; and who 
in  a  very  brief  time  came  to  be  the  masters,  guides,  and  just  rulers  of  the  most 
civilized  and  politically  and  socially  advanced  peoples  and  states,  and  to  rule  the 
world from east to west in universally approved fashion. 

The Third: the confirmation provided with unanimous and certain knowledge by 
that lofty group of punctilious and profound scholars of whom in each age thousands 
spring forth, who advance in wondrous fashion in every science and work in different 
fields. 

Thus, the testimony brought by this being to the divine unity is not  

                                                 
2 ‘Ali al-Qari, al-Asrar al-Marfu’a, 193. 
3 Gumushkhaneli Ahmed Ziya al-Din, Majmu’at al-Ahzab, i, 561. 

259

 

 

260

particular and individual, but general and universal and unshakeable. If all the demons 
that exist were to unite, they could not challenge it. Such was the conclusion reached 
by the traveller. 

In reference to the lesson learned in the School of Light by that traveller from the 
world, that wayfarer in life, when he visited in his mind the blessed age of the Prophet 
(UWBP), we said at the end of the Sixteenth Degree of the First Station: 

There is no god but God, the Necessary Existent, the One, the Unique, the 
Necessity of Whose Existence in Unity is indicated by the Pride of the World 
and the Glory of the Sons of Adam, through the majesty of the sovereignty of 
his Qur’an, the splendour of the expanse of his religion, the multiplicity of 
his perfections, and the exaltedness of his characteristics, as confirmed even 
by the testimony of his enemies. He bears witness and brings proof through 
the  strength  of  his  hundreds  of  manifest  and  evident  miracles,  that  both 
testify to truth and are themselves the object of true testimony; and through 
the strength of the thousands of luminous and conclusive truths contained in 
his  religion,  according  to  the  consensus  of  all  the  possessors  of  light,  the 
agreement of his illumined Companions, and the unanimity of the scholars 
of his community, the possessors of proofs and luminous insight. 

 

 

260

261

The Twentieth Letter 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
There is no god but God, He is One, He has no partner; His is the dominion, 
and His is the praise; He alone grants life, and deals death, and He is living 
and  dies  not;  all  good  is  in  His  hand,  He  is  powerful  over  all things,  and 
with Him all things have their end.1 

 [This  sentence  expressing  divine  unity,  which  is  recited  following  the 
morning and  evening prayers, possesses  numerous  merits2 and according to 
an authentic narration bears the degree of the Greatest Name.3 It consists of 
eleven phrases each of which conveys both some good tidings, and a degree 
in  the  unity  of  dominicality  (tevhid-i  rubûbiyet),  and  an  aspect  of  the 
grandeur and perfection of divine unity from the point of view of a Greatest 
Name. Referring a full explanation of these vast, elevated truths to other parts 
of the Risale-i Nur, in fulfilment of a promise we shall for now write a brief, 
index-like summary of them in two “Stations” and an “Introduction.”]  

                                                 
1 Bukhari, Adhan, 155; Tahajjud 21; Muslim, Dhikr, 28, 30, 74, 75, 76; Tirmidhi, Mawaqit, 108; Hajj, 
104; Nasa’i, Sahw, 83-6; Ibn Maja, Du^a, 10, 14, 16; Abu Da’ud, Manasik, 56; Darimi, Salat, 88, 90; 
Muwatta’, Hajj, 127, 243; Qur’an, 20, 22; Musnad, i, 47; ii, 5; iii, 320; iv, 4; v, 191. 
2 See, Musnad, iv, 60; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, x, 107. 
3 See, Ibn Maja, Du’a, 9. 

261

 

 

262

Introduction 

Be certain of this, that the highest aim of creation and its most important result is 
belief  in  God.  The  most  exalted  rank  in  humanity  and  its  highest  degree  is  the 
knowledge  of  God  contained  within  belief  in  God.  The  most  radiant  happiness  and 
sweetest  bounty  for  jinn  and  human  beings  is  the  love  of  God  contained  within the 
knowledge of God. And the purest joy  for the  human spirit and the sheerest delight 
for man’s heart is the rapture of the spirit contained within the love of God. Yes, all 
true happiness, pure joy, sweet bounties, and untroubled pleasure lie in knowledge of 
God and love of God; they cannot exist without them. 

The  person  who  knows  and  loves God  Almighty  may  receive  endless  bounties, 
happiness, lights, and mysteries. While the one who does not truly know and love him 
is afflicted spiritually and materially by endless misery, pain, and fears. Even if such 
an impotent, miserable person owned the whole world, it would be worth nothing for 
him,  for it  would  seem  to  him  that  he  was  living  a  fruitless  life  among  the  vagrant 
human  race  in  a  wretched  world  without  owner  or  protector.  Everyone  may 
understand just how forlorn and baffled is man among the aimless human race in this 
bewildering fleeting world if he does not know his Owner, if he does not discover his 
Master. But if he does discover and know Him, he will seek refuge in His mercy and 
will  rely  on  His  power.  The  desolate  world  will  turn  into  a  place  of  recreation  and 
pleasure, it will become a place of trade for the hereafter.  

First Station 

Each  of  the  eleven  phrases  of  the  above-mentioned  sentence  affirming  divine 
unity contains some  good news. And in the  good news  lies a cure, while  in each of 
those cures a spritual pleasure is to be found. 

THE FIRST PHRASE:  “There is no god but God” 

This phrase conveys the following good news to the human spirit, suffering as it 
does  countless  needs  and  the  attacks  of  innumerable  enemies.  On  the  one  hand  the 
spirit  finds  a  place  of  recourse,  a  source  of  help,  through  which  is  opened  to  it  the 
door  of  a  treasury  of  mercy  that  will  guarantee  all  its  needs.  While  on  the  other  it 
finds a  support  and source of  strength,  for  the  phrase  makes  known  its  Creator  and 
True Object of Worship, who possesses the absolute power to secure it from the evil 
of all its  

 

 

262

263

enemies; it shows its master, and who it is that owns it. Through pointing this out, the 
phrase  saves  the  heart  from  utter  desolation  and  the  spirit  from  aching  sorrow;  it 
ensures an eternal joy, a perpetual happiness. 

THE SECOND PHRASE:  “He is One” 

This  phrase  announces  the  following  good  news,  which  is  both  healing  and  a 

source of happiness: 

Man’s  spirit  and  heart,  which  are  connected  to  most  of  the  creatures  in  the 
universe  and  are  almost  overwhelmed  in  misery  and  confusion  on  account  of  this 
connection,  find  in  the  phrase  “He  is  One”  a  refuge  and  protector  that  will  deliver 
them from all the confusion and bewilderment. 

That is to say, it is as if “He is One” is saying to man: God is One. Do not wear 
yourself out having recourse to other things; do not demean yourself and feel indebted 
to them; do not flatter them and fawn on them and humiliate  yourself; do not follow 
them  and  make  things  difficult  for  yourself;  do  not  fear  them  and  tremble  before 
them; for the Monarch of the universe  is One, the key to all things is with  Him, the 
reins  of  all  things  are  in  His  hand,  everything  will  be  resolved  by  His  command.  If 
you find Him, you will be saved from endless indebtedness, countless fears. 

THE THIRD PHRASE:  “He has no partner” 

Just as in His divinity and in His sovereignty God has no partner, He is One and 
cannot be many; so too He has no partner in His dominicality and in His actions and 
in His creating. It sometimes happens that a monarch is one, having no partner in his 
sovereignty,  but  in  the  execution  of  his  affairs  his  officials  act  as  his  partners;  they 
prevent everyone from entering his presence, saying: “Apply to us!” 

However, God Almighty, the Monarch of Pre-Eternity and Post-Eternity, has no 
partner  in  His  sovereignty,  just  as  He  has  no  need  for  partners  or  helpers  in  the 
execution of His dominicality.  

If  it  were  not  for  His  command  and  will,  His  strength  and  power,  not  a  single 
thing could interfere with another. Everyone can have recourse to Him directly. Since 
He  has  no  partner  or  helper,  no  one  seeking  recourse  can  be  told:  “Stop!  It  is 
forbidden to enter His presence!” 

This phrase, therefore, delivers the following joyful announcement to the human 
spirit:  the  human  spirit  which  has  attained  to  faith  may,  without  let  or  hindrance, 
opposition  or  interference,  in  any  state,  for  any  wish,  at  any  time  and  in  any  place, 
enter  the  presence  of  the  All-Beauteous  and  Glorious  One,  the  One  of  power  and 
perfection, who is the Pre-Eternal and Post-Eternal Owner of the treasuries of mercy, 
the treasuries of bliss, and  

 

 

263

264

may present its needs. Discovering His mercy and relying on His power, it will find 
perfect ease and happiness. 

THE FOURTH PHRASE:  “His is the dominion” 

That is to say, ownership is altogether His. As for you, you are both His property, 
you  are  owned  by  Him,  and  you  work  in  His  property.  This  phrase  announces  the 
following joyful and healing news: 

O man! Do not suppose that you own yourself, for you have no control over any 
of the things that concern  you; such a load would be heavy. Also, you are unable to 
protect yourself, to avoid disasters, or to do the things that you must. In which case, 
do not suffer pain and torment without reason, the ownership is another’s. The Owner 
is both All-Powerful and All-Merciful; rely on His power and do not cast aspersions 
on  His  mercy!  Put  grief  behind  you,  be  joyful!  Discard  your  troubles  and  find 
serenity! 

It also says: You love and are connected to the universe, which is the property of 
the All-Powerful and Merciful One,  yet although  it grieves  you by its wretchedness, 
you are unable to put it right. So hand over the property to its Owner, leave it to Him. 
Attract His pleasure, not His harshness. He is both All-Wise and All-Merciful. He has 
free disposal over His property and administers  it as He wishes. Whenever  you take 
fright, say like İbrahim Hakkı: “Let’s see what the Master does; whatever He does, it 
is best;” understand this thoroughly and do not interfere! 

THE FIFTH PHRASE:  “His is the praise” 

Praise,  laudation, and acclaim are proper to Him, are fitting  for Him. That  is to 
say,  bounties  are  His;  they  come  from  His  treasury.  And  as  for  the  treasury,  it  is 
unending. This phrase, therefore, delivers the following good news: 

O man! Do not suffer and sorrow when bounties cease, for the treasury of mercy 
is inexhaustible. Do not dwell on the fleeting nature of pleasure and cry out with pain, 
because  the  fruit  of  the  bounty  is  the  fruit  of  a  boundless  mercy.  Since  its  tree  is 
undying, when the fruit finishes it is replaced by more. If you thankfully think of there 
being  within  the  pleasure  of  the  bounty  a  merciful  favour  a  hundred  times  more 
pleasurable, you will be able to increase the pleasure a hundredfold. 

An apple an august monarch presents to you holds a pleasure superior to that of a 
hundred, indeed a thousand, apples, for it is he that has bestowed it on you and made 
you  experience  the  pleasure  of a  royal  favour.  In  the  same  way,  through the  phrase 
“His is the praise” will be opened to  you the door of a spiritual pleasure a thousand 
times sweeter than the bounty itself.  

 

 

264

265

For  the  phrase  means  to  offer  praise  and  thanks;  that  is  to  say,  to  perceive  the 
bestowal of bounty. This in turn means to recognize the Bestower, which is to reflect 
on the bestowal of bounty, and so finally to ponder over the favour of His compassion 
and His continuing to bestow bounties. 

THE SIXTH PHRASE:  “He alone grants life” 

That is to say, He is the giver of life. And it is He who causes life to continue by 
means of sustenance. He also supplies the necessities of life. And it is to Him that the 
exalted aims of life pertain and its important results look, and His are ninety-nine out 
of  a  hundred  of  its  fruits.  Thus,  this  phrase  calls  out  in  this  way  to  ephemeral, 
impotent man, it makes this joyful announcement: 

O man! Do not trouble yourself by shouldering the heavy burdens of life. Do not 
think  of  the  transience  of  life  and  start  grieving.  Do  not  see  only  its  worldly  and 
unimportant fruits and regret that you came to this world. For the life-machine in the 
ship of  your being belongs to the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One, and it  is  He 
who provides for all its expenses and requirements. Also, your life has a great many 
aims and results, and they pertain to Him, too. 

As for you, you are just a helmsman on the ship, so do your duty well and take 
the wage and pleasure that  come with  it. Think of  just  how precious is the  life-ship 
and  how  valuable  its  benefits;  then  think  of  just  how  Generous  and  Merciful  is  the 
Owner of the ship. So rejoice and give thanks and know that when you perform your 
duty with integrity, all the results the ship produces will in one respect be transferred 
to  the  register  of  your  actions,  that  they  will  secure  an  immortal  life  for  you,  will 
endow you with eternal life. 

THE SEVENTH PHRASE:  “And deals death” 

He is the one who causes death. He discharges you from the duty of life, changes 
your  abode  from  this  transitory  world,  and  releases  you  from  the  labour  of  service. 
That  is,  He  takes  you  from  a  transient  life  to  an  immortal  one.  This  phrase,  then, 
shouts out the following to ephemeral jinn and man: 

Here  is  good  news  for  you!  Death  is  not  destruction,  or  nothingness,  or 
annihilation;  it  is  not  cessation  or  extinction;  it  is  not  eternal  separation,  or  non-
existence,  or  a  chance  event;  it  is  not  authorless  obliteration.  Rather,  it  is  to  be 
discharged by the Author who is All-Wise and All-Compassionate; it  is a change of 
abode. It is to be despatched to eternal bliss, to your true home. It is the door of union 
to the Intermediate Realm, which is where you will meet with ninety-nine per cent of 
your friends. 

 

 

265

266

THE EIGHTH PHRASE:  “And He is living and dies not” 

That  is  to  say,  the  Possessor  of  a  beauty,  perfection,  and  munificence  that  are 
infinitely  superior  to  the  beauty,  perfection,  and  munificence  to  be  seen  in  the 
creatures of the universe, and that arouse love; and an Eternal Object of Worship, an 
Everlasting Beloved, a single manifestation of whose beauty is sufficent to replace all 
other beloveds, has an enduring life through pre-eternity and post-eternity – a life free 
from  any  trace  of  cessation  or  ephemerality  and  exempt  from  any  fault,  defect,  or 
imperfection.  Thus,  this  phrase  proclaims  to  jinn  and  man,  to  all  conscious  beings, 
and the people of love and ardour: 

Here  is  good  news  for  you!  There  exists  an  Everlasting  Beloved  who  will  cure 
and  bind  the  wounds  caused  you  by  countless  separations  from  the  ones  you  love. 
Since  He  exists  and  is  undying,  whatever  happens  do  not  fret  over  the  others. 
Furthermore, the beauty and generosity, virtue and perfection to be seen in them, the 
cause  of  your  love,  are,  passing  through  many  veils,  the  shadows  of  the  palest  of 
shadows of the manifestation of the Ever-Enduring Beloved’s ever-enduring beauty. 
Do not grieve at their disappearance, for they are mirrors of a sort. The mirrors being 
changed renews and embellishes the manifestation of the Beauty’s radiance. Since He 
exists, everything exists. 

THE NINTH PHRASE:  “All good is in His hand” 

Every  good  action  you  perform  is  transferred  to  His  register.  Every  righteous 
deed  you  do  is  recorded  with  Him.  Thus,  this  phrase  calls  out  to  jinn  and  mankind 
with the following good news: 

O  wretched  ones!  When  you  journey  to  the  grave  do  not  cry  out  in  despair, 
“Alas! Everything we owned is destroyed, all our efforts are wasted; we have left the 
beautiful  broad  earth  and  entered  the  narrow  grave,”  for  everything  of  yours  is 
preserved, all your actions written down, every service you have rendered recorded. A 
Glorious One in whose hand is all good and who is able to bring all good to fruition, 
will reward your service: drawing you to Himself, He will keep you only temporarily 
under the ground. Later, He will bring you to His presence. What happiness for those 
of  you  who  have  completed  their  service  and  duty;  your  labour  is  finished,  you are 
departing for ease and mercy! Service and toil are over, you are going to receive your 
wage! 

The All-Powerful One of Glory preserves seeds and grains, which are the pages 
of  the  register  of  last  spring’s  deeds  and  the  deposit-boxes  of  its  services,  and 
publishes them the following spring in glittering fashion,  

 

 

266

267

indeed, in a manner a hundred times more plentiful than the originals. The results of 
your  life  He  is  preserving  in  the  same  way,  and  will  reward  your  service  in  a  truly 
abundant fashion. 

THE TENTH PHRASE:  “And He is Powerful over all things” 

He is One, He is Unique, He has power over everything. Nothing at all is difficult 
for Him. To create the spring is as easy for Him as to create a flower, and He creates 
Paradise with as much ease as He creates the spring. The innumerable artefacts which 
He  continuously  creates  every  day,  every  year,  every  century,  witness  with 
numberless  tongues  to  His  boundless  power.  Thus,  this  phrase  too  delivers  good 
news: 

O  man!  The  service  you  have  offered  and  the  worship  you  have  performed  are 
not for nothing. A realm of reward, an abode of bliss, has been prepared for you. An 
unending Paradise is awaiting you in place of this fleeting world of yours. Have faith 
and  confidence  in  the  promise  of  the  Glorious  Creator  whom  you  know  and  whom 
you  worship,  for  it  is  impossible  for  Him  to  break  His  promise.  In  absolutely  no 
respect  is  there  any  deficiency  in  His  power;  impotence  cannot  impede  His  works. 
Just as He creates  your tiny garden, so He is able to create Paradise for you, and He 
has  created  it  and  promised  it  to  you.  And  because  He  has  promised,  He  shall,  of 
course, admit you to it! 

We  observe  every  year  on  the  face  of  the  earth  that  He  gathers  together  and 
disperses  with  perfect  order  and  balance,  with  perfect  timing  and  ease,  more  than 
three hundred thousand species and groups of animals and plants. Most certainly such 
an All-Powerful One of Glory is capable of carrying out His promise.  

Since, being thus absolutely Powerful He creates samples of the resurrection and 
Paradise in thousands of forms every year; and since, promising eternal bliss through 
all  His  revealed  scriptures,  He  gives  the  glad  tidings  of  Paradise;  and  since  all  His 
actions  and  deeds  are  carried  out  with  truth,  veracity,  and  seriousness;  and  since, 
through the testimony of all His works of art, all perfections point to and testify to His 
infinite perfection, there being in absolutely no respect any defect or fault in Him; and 
since  the  breaking  of  a  promise,  lying,  falsehood,  and  deception  are  the  ugliest  of 
qualities besides being defects and faults; then most decidedly and most certainly that 
All-Powerful One of Glory, that All-Wise One of Perfection, that All-Merciful One of 
Beauty,  will  carry  out  His  promise;  He  will  open  the  gate  to  eternal  bliss;  He  will 
admit  you,  O  people  of  faith,  to  Paradise,  which  was  the  original  home  of  your 
forefather Adam. 

 

 

267

268

THE ELEVENTH PHRASE:  “And with Him all things have their end” 

Human beings are sent to this world, the realm of trial and examination, with the 
important  duties  of  trading  and  acting  as  officials.  After  they  have  concluded  their 
transactions, accomplished their duties, and completed their service, they will return 
and meet once more with their Generous Master and Glorious Creator who sent them 
forth  in  the  first  place.  Leaving  this  transient  realm,  they  will  be  honoured  and 
elevated to the presence of grandeur in the realm of permanence. That is to say, being 
delivered from the turbulence of causes and from the obscure veils of intermediaries, 
they  will  meet  with  their  Merciful  Sustainer  without  veil  at  the  seat  of  His  eternal 
majesty. Everyone will find his Creator, True Object of Worship, Sustainer, Lord, and 
Owner and will know Him directly. Thus, this phrase proclaims the following joyful 
news, which is greater than all the rest: 

O man! Do you know where you are going and where you are being driven? As is 
stated at  the end  of  the  Thirty-Second  Word, a  thousand  years  of  happy  life  in  this 
world cannot be compared to one hour of life in Paradise. And a thousand years of life 
in  Paradise  cannot  be  compared  to  one  hour’s  vision  of  the  sheer  loveliness  of  the 
Beauteous  One  of  Glory.  You  are  going  to  the  realm  of  His  mercy,  and  to  His 
presence. 

The loveliness and beauty in all the creatures of this world and in those worldly 
beloveds  by  which  you  are  so  stricken  and  obsessed  and  for  which  you  are  so 
desirous,  are  but  a  sort  of  shadow  of  the  manifestation  of  His  beauty  and  of  the 
loveliness  of  His  names;  and  all  Paradise  with  all  of  its  subtle  wonders,  a  single 
manifestation of His mercy; and all longing and love and allurement and captivation, 
but a flash of the love of the Eternal Worshipful One and Everlasting Beloved. You 
are going to the sphere of His presence. You are being summoned to Paradise, which 
is an eternal feasting place. Since this is so, you should enter the grave not weeping, 
but smiling in expectation.  

The phrase announces this good news as well: O man!  Do not be apprehensive, 
imagining  that  you  are  going  to  extinction,  non-existence,  nothingness,  darkness, 
oblivion,  decay,  and  dissolution,  and  that  you  will  drown  in  multiplicity.  You  are 
going  not  to  extinction,  but  to  permanence.  You  are  being  impelled  not  to  non-
existence,  but  to  perpetual  existence.  You  are  going  to  enter  not  darkness,  but  the 
world of light. And you are returning to your true owner, to the seat of the Pre-Eternal 
Monarch. You will not drown in multiplicity,  you will take  your rest in the realm of 
unity. You are bound not for separation, but for union.” 

 

 

268

269

Second Station 

 [The Second Station proves  divine  unity at the level  of  the Greatest Name, 
briefly and in summary form.] 

THE FIRST PHRASE:  “There is no god but God” 

In  this  phrase  is  an  affirmation  of  the  unity  of  the  Godhead  and  of  the  True 

Object of Worship. An extremely powerful proof of this degree is as follows: 

A most orderly activity is apparent on the face of the universe, especially on the 
page of the earth. And we observe there a most wise creativity. And we clearly see a 
systematic  unfolding;  that  is,  everything  being  expanded and  revealed  and  given  an 
appropriate  shape  and  form.  Furthermore,  we  see  a  most  compassionate,  generous, 
and  merciful  munificence  and  bountifulness.  Since  this  is  so,  it  of  necessity  proves, 
indeed  provokes  awareness  of,  the  necessary  existence  and  unity  of  an  Active, 
Creative, Opening, and Munificent Possessor of Glory. 

Indeed,  the  constant  evanescence  and  renewal  of  beings  demonstrate  that  those 
beings are the manifestations of the sacred names of an All-Powerful Maker, and are 
shadows  of  the  lights  of  His  names;  that  they  are  works  of  art  produced  by  His 
actions, and impressions and pages inscribed by the pen of divine determining (kader) 
and power; that they are mirrors reflecting the beauty of His perfection. 

Just as the Owner of the universe proves this mighty truth and exalted degree of 
the  affirmation  of  His  unity  with  all  the  scriptures  and  sacred  books  that  He  has 
revealed,  so  have  the  people  of  truth  and the  perfected members  of  the  human  race 
proved it through their investigations and discoveries. The universe too points to this 
degree  through  the  unceasing  testimonies  of  the  miracles  of  art,  wonders  of  power, 
and treasuries of wealth that it displays, despite its impotence and poverty. That is to 
say,  the  scriptures  and  books  of  the  Pre-Eternal  Witness,  and  the  investigations  and 
unveilings of the people of witnessing, and the orderly states and wise and purposeful 
functions  of  the  Manifest  World are united  in  their  agreement  on  this  degree  of  the 
affirmation of divine unity. 

Those who do not accept the Single One of Unity (Vâhid-i Ehad), therefore, must 
either accept innumerable gods, or else like the foolish Sophists, deny both their own 
existence and that of the universe. 

 

 

269

270

THE SECOND PHRASE:  “He is One” 

This phrase demonstrates an explicit degree of the affirmation of divine unity. A 

convincing and comprehensive argument proving it is as follows: 

When we open our eyes, when the universe fastens our gaze on its face, the first 
thing  to  attract  our  attention  is  a  universal  and  perfect  order;  we  see  that  there  is  a 
comprehensive,  sensitive  equilibrium;  everything  exists  within  a  precise  order  and 
delicate balance and measure. 

When  we  look  a  little  more  carefully, a  continual  ordering  and balancing strike 
our eye. That is to say,  someone is changing the  order with regularity and renewing 
the balance with measuredness. Everything is a model and is clothed in a great many 
orderly balanced forms. 

When  we  study  it  even  more  closely,  a  wisdom  and  justice  appear  behind  the 
ordering and balancing. A purpose and benefit are considered, a truth, a usefulness are 
followed in the motion of everything, even the minutest particles. 

When  we  study  it  with  even  greater  attention,  what  strikes  the  gaze  of  our 
consciousness is the demonstration of a power within an extremely wise activity, and 
the manifestation of a comprehensive knowledge that encompasses all things together 
with all their attributes. 

That  is  to  say,  the  order  and  balance  in  all  beings  show  us  plainly  a  universal 
ordering and balancing; and the ordering and balancing show us a universal wisdom 
and justice; and the wisdom and justice in turn show us a power and knowledge. That 
is,  it  is  apparent  that  behind  these  veils  is  One  Powerful  over  all  things  who  has 
Knowledge of all things. 

Furthermore,  we  look  to  the  beginning  and  end  of  everything,  and  we  see, 
particularly in animate creatures, that their beginnings, origins, and roots are such that 
it is as if their seeds contain all the systems and members of those creatures, each in 
the  form of an  instruction sheet and timetable. Then their  fruits and results are such 
that  the  meanings  of  those  animate  creatures  are  filtered  and  concentrated  in  them; 
they bequeath their life  histories to them. It is as if their seeds are collections of the 
principles according to which they were given existence, and their fruits and results a 
sort of index of the commands that brought them into existence. Then we look to the 
outer and inner faces of those animate creatures: the  free disposal of an utterly wise 
power and the fashioning and ordering of an utterly effective will are apparent. That 
is, a strength and power create; a command and will clothe with form. 

Thus,  when  we  study  beings  attentively,  we  observe  that  their  beginnings  are 

instruction sheets prepared by One Possessing Knowledge, and  

 

 

270

271

that  their  ends  are  plans  and  manifestos  of  a  Maker;  that  their  outer  faces  are 
beautifully proportioned dresses of artistry devised by One who Chooses and Wills, 
and their inner faces, well-designed machines of an All-Powerful One. 

This  situation,  therefore,  necessarily  and  self-evidently  proclaims  that  no  time 
and  no  place,  absolutely  nothing,  can  be  outside  the  grip  of  power  of  one  single 
Glorious  Maker.  Each  thing  and  all  things  together  with  all  of  their  attributes  are 
planned and directed within the grip of power of an All-Powerful Possessor of Will; 
they  are  made  beautiful  through  the  ordering  and  graciousness  of  a  Merciful  and 
Compassionate  One;  and  they  are  embellished  with  the  adorning  of  a  Loving 
Benefactor. 

Indeed,  for  anyone  who  is  intelligent  and  has  eyes  in  his  head,  the  order  and 
equilibrium,  and  ordering  and  adorning  in  the  universe  and  in  the  beings  within  it 
demonstrate,  at  the  degree  of unity,  One  who  is  Single,  Sole, Solitary,  Unique,  All-
Powerful, Possessing of Will, All-Knowing, and All-Wise. 

Assuredly,  there  is  a  unity  in  everything,  and  as  for unity,  it  points  to  one.  For 
example,  the  whole  world  is  illuminated  by  one  lamp,  the  sun;  in  which  case,  the 
world’s Owner is One and the  same. And, for example, all the  animate creatures on 
the earth are  served by air, fire, and water, which are the  same. Since this  is  so, the 
One who employs them and subjugates them to us is also One. 

THE THIRD PHRASE:  “He has no partner” 

This  phrase  is  proved cogently  and  brilliantly  in the  First  Station  of  the  Thirty-
Second Word, so we refer you to that. It cannot be more clearly elucidated; there is no 
need for further explanation. 

THE FOURTH PHRASE:  “His is the dominion” 

That is, every creature from the face of the earth to the Divine Throne, from the 
ground to the Pleiades, from the minutest particles to the heavenly bodies, everything 
from  pre-eternity  to  post-eternity,  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  this  world  and  the 
hereafter, belongs to Him. His  is the  highest degree of ownership in the  form of the 
greatest  affirmation  of  divine  unity  (tevhid-i  âzam).  A  mighty  proof  of  this  was 
imparted  to  this  powerless  one’s  mind  in  Arabic  at  a  pleasant  time  in  pleasant 
circumstances. For the sake of that pleasant memory we shall note down those same 
phrases, then write their meanings: 

His  is  the  dominion  because:  the  macrocosm  is  similar  to  the  microcosm; 
what is fashioned by His power is a missive expressing His deter 

 

 

271

272

mining;  His  creating  the  macrocosm  makes  it  as  a  place  of  prostration, 
while His giving of existence to the microcosm makes it as prostrating; His 
bringing  the  former  into being  makes  it  as  a property,  while  His  giving of 
existence to the latter makes it as owned; His art in the former displays it as 
a book, while His colouring in the latter shines through speech; His power 
in the former reveals His majesty, while His mercy in the latter arrays His 
bounty; His majesty in the former testifies that He is One, while His bounty 
in the latter proclaims that He is Single, Undivided; His stamp on the former 
is on all things, universal and particular, while His seal on the latter is on 
the body and on the limbs. 

F  i  r  s  t    S  e c  t  i  o  n  :  “The  macrocosm  is  similar  to  the  microcosm;  what  is 
fashioned by His power is a missive expressing His determining.” That is to say, the 
macrocosm, which  is called the universe, and the microcosm, which  is  its miniature 
specimen and is called man, point to evidences of divine unity, both within man’s self 
and outside it, that are written by the pens of divine power and divine determining. 

There is within man the sample, on a very small scale, of the orderly art which is 
in the universe. And as the art that is present in the vast sphere testifies to the Single 
Maker, so the microscopic art which is on a tiny scale in man points to the Maker and 
demonstrates  His unity. Moreover,  as  man  is  a  meaningful  missive  inscribed  by  his 
Sustainer, and a well-composed ode written by divine determining, so is the universe 
a well-composed ode written by that same pen, but on a vast scale. 

Is it at all possible that anything other than the Single One of Unity could have a 
hand  in  placing  the  stamp  of  uniqueness  on  men’s  faces,  which,  although  they 
resemble one another, all have their distinguishing marks; and have a hand in setting 
the  seal  of  unity  on  the  universe,  all  of  whose  creatures  co-operate,  helping  and 
supporting one another? Could anything interfere in this? 

S e c o n d  S e c t i o n : “His creating the macrocosm makes  it as a place of 
prostration, while His giving of existence to the microcosm makes it as prostrating.” It 
has  this  meaning:  the  All-Wise  Maker  created  the  macrocosm  in  such  a  novel, 
wonderful form, inscribing on it the signs of His grandeur, that He transformed it into 
a mighty mosque. And He created man in this way: giving him intellect and causing 
him  to  prostrate  in  wonderment  with  it  at  those  miracles  of  His  art  and  at  His 
wondrous power, He caused him to read the signs of His grandeur. Thus girding him 
ready for worship in that mighty mosque, He created him as a prostrating slave. 
Is it at all possible that the true object of worship of those prostrating  

 

 

272

273

worshippers in this mighty mosque could be other than the One, Single Maker? 

T  h  i  r  d    S  e  c  t  i  o  n  :  “His  bringing  the  former  into  being  makes  it  as  a 
property,  while  His  giving  of  existence  to the  latter  makes  it  as  owned.”  It  has  this 
meaning: the Glorious Lord of All Dominion created the macrocosm, and especially 
the  face  of  the  earth,  so  that  it  resembles  countless  concentric  circles  or  spheres. 
Every  sphere  is  like  an  arable  field  where,  minute  by  minute,  season  by  season, 
century by century, He sows, reaps, and harvests crops. He continuously administers 
His property, and works it. 

He has made the world of minute particles, the largest sphere, into a field. With 
His power and with His wisdom, He unceasingly sows crops in it to the extent of the 
universe, and reaps and harvests them. He despatches them from the Manifest World 
to the World of the Unseen; from the sphere of power to the sphere of knowledge. 

Next  He  has  made  the  face  of  the  earth,  which  is  a  medium  sphere,  a  place  of 
cultivation  in  exactly  the  same  way,  where,  season  by  season,  He  plants  worlds, 
species,  and  reaps  and  harvests  them.  His  immaterial  crops  too  He  sends  to  the 
immaterial worlds, to the Worlds of the Unseen, and the hereafter, and the World of 
Similitudes. 

A  garden,  too,  which  is  a  smaller  sphere,  He  fills  hundreds  and  thousands  of 
times with power and empties with wisdom. And from the even smaller sphere of an 
animate creature, a tree or a human being, for example, He harvests crops that are a 
hundred times  greater  than  the  being  itself.  That  is  to  say,  the  Glorious  Lord of  All 
Dominion creates all things, great and small, universal and particular, as models, and 
clothes them in hundreds of ways in the weavings of His art, which are embroidered 
with continuously renewed inscriptions; He displays the manifestations of His names, 
the miracles of  His power. He  has created everything  in  His property as a page;  He 
writes meaningful letters in hundreds of ways on each page; He displays His wisdom, 
His signs, and He invites intelligent creatures to read them. 

In  addition  to  bringing  the  macrocosm  into  being  in  the  form  of  a  cultivated 
property,  He  has  created  man  and  has  given  him  such  tools  and  abilities,  senses, 
feelings, and especially such a soul, such desires, needs, appetities, greed and claims, 
that in that extensive property he is like a totally owned creature who is in need of all 
of it. 

Is  it  therefore  at  all  possible  that  anything  apart  from  the  Glorious  Lord  of  All 
Dominion, who makes everything from the vast world of minute particles to a fly, as a 
field  and  cultivated  property,  and  makes  insignificant  man  a  spectator,  inspector, 
tiller, merchant, herald, worshipper, and slave  

 

 

273

274

in  that  vast  property  and  takes  him  as  an  honoured  guest  and  beloved  addressee  of 
Himself – could anything other than Him have free disposal over the property and be 
lord over the totally owned slave? 

F o u r t h  S e c t i o n : “His art in the former displays it as a book, while His 
colouring  in  the  latter  shines  through  speech.”  Its  meaning  is  this:  the  Glorious 
Maker’s  art  in  the  macrocosm  is  so  meaningful  that  because  it  is  manifested  in  the 
form of a book, thus making the universe into a huge volume, the human intellect has 
extracted the library of true natural science and philosophy from it and has written the 
library accordingly. And that book of wisdom is bound to reality and draws assistance 
from reality to such a degree that it has been proclaimed in the form of the All-Wise 
Qur’an, which is a copy of that huge manifested book.  

Moreover, just as His art in the universe is in the form of a book, describing its 
perfect orderedness,  so  too  His  colouring  and  the  inscription  of  His  wisdom  in  man 
has  opened  the  flower  of  speech.  That  is,  His  art  is  so  meaningful,  sensitive,  and 
beautiful  that  it  has  caused  the  components  of  that  animate  machine  to  speak  as 
though  they  were  gramophones.  It  has  given man  such  a dominical  colouring  in  his 
“fairest  of  forms”  that  the  flower  of  speech  and  expression,  which  is  immaterial, 
insubstantial and living, has opened in his material, corporeal and solid head. And it 
has equipped  the  power of  speech  and  expression,  which  is  situated  in  man’s  head, 
with such exalted tools and abilities that it has caused it to develop and progress to a 
degree  whereat  he  becomes  the  addressee  of  the  Pre-Eternal  Monarch.  That  is,  the 
dominical  colouring  in  man’s  essential  nature  has  opened  the  flower  of  divine 
address. 

Is  it  at  all  possible  that  anything  other  than  the  Single  One  of  Unity  could 
interfere in that art in creatures, which is so high as to be in the form of a book, and in 
that  colouring  in  man  whereby  he  attains  to  the  station  of  speech  and  address?  God 
forbid! 

F i f t h  S e c t i o n : “His power in the former reveals His majesty, while His 
mercy  in  the  latter  arrays  His  bounty.”  It  has  this  meaning:  divine  power  in  the 
macrocosm demonstrates the majesty of  His dominicality, whereas dominical mercy 
arrays  His  bounties  in  man,  who  is  the  microcosm.  That  is,  the  Maker’s  power,  in 
respect of grandeur and glory (celâl), creates the universe in the form of a palace so 
magnificent  that  its  sun  is  a  mighty  electric  light,  its  moon,  a  lamp,  and  its  stars, 
candles, gilded fruits and scattered lights. While the face of the earth is a laden table, 
an  arable  field,  a  garden,  a  carpet;  and  its  mountains,  each  a  storehouse,  a  mast,  a 
fortress; and so on. 

He demonstrates the majesty of His dominicality in brilliant fashion by,  

 

 

274

275

on a vast scale, making all things into the huge palace’s necessities; and His mercy, in 
respect  of  beauty  (cemâl),  bestows  on  all  creatures  with  spirits,  and  even  on  the 
minutest  animate  creatures,  the  varieties  of  His  bounties,  ordering  their  beings  with 
them.  He  adorns  them  from  head  to  toe  with  the  bounties,  embellishing  them 
abundantly,  munificently.  He  has  counterpoised  the  beauty  of  His  mercy  and  that 
glorious majesty, those microscopic tongues and that vast tongue. 

That  is,  while  the  huge  heavenly  bodies  like  the  suns  and  constellations  are 
proclaiming with the tongue of majesty: “O Glorious One! O Mighty One! O August 
One!”, those tiny  animate creatures, like  flies and fishes, are declaring, but with the 
tongue of mercy: “O Beautiful One! O Compassionate One! O Generous One!”; they 
are adding their gentle songs to that great orchestra, sweetening it. 

Is  it at all possible that anything other than the All-Glorious One of Beauty and 
All-Beauteous One of Glory could have any part in the creation of the macrocosm and 
microcosm? God forbid! 

S i x t h  S e c t i o n : “His majesty in the former testifies that He is One, while 
His  bounty  in  the  latter  proclaims  that  he  is  Single.”  Its  meaning  is  this:  just  as  the 
majesty  of  dominicality,  which  is  manifested  in  the  totality  of  the  universe,  proves 
and demonstrates divine unity (vahdâniyet), so dominical bounty, which bestows on 
the  members  of  animate  creatures  their  regular provisions,  proves  and  demonstrates 
divine oneness (ehadiyet). 

As for unity,  it  is to say that all those creatures belong to One and they look to 
One and they are the creation of One. Whereas by oneness is meant that most of the 
names of the Creator of all things are manifested in all beings. For example, the light 
of the sun may be seen as analogous to unity by reason of its comprehending the face 
of  the  earth. While  the  fact  that  its  light  and  heat, the  seven  colours  in  its  light  and 
some  sort  of  shadow  of  it  are  found  in  all  transparent  objects  and  drops  of  water 
makes them analogous to oneness. And the fact that most of the Maker’s  names are 
manifested in each single thing, especially in each animate creature, and above all in 
man, points to oneness. 

Thus,  this  section  indicates  that  the  majesty  of  dominicality  (rubûbiyet),  which 
has total disposal over the universe, makes the huge sun a servant, a lamp, and a stove 
for animate creatures on the face of the earth; and makes the mighty earth a cradle, a 
hostel,  and  place  of  trade  for  them;  and  fire,  a  cook  and  friend  present  everywhere; 
and clouds, strainers and wet-nurses; and mountains, storehouses and treasuries; and 
the air, a fan for animate creatures, for breathing in and out; and water, a nurse who 
suckles new  

 

 

275

276

arrivals to life and a seller of sweet drinks who supplies animals with the water of life; 
this divine dominicality demonstrates divine unity most lucidly. 

Indeed,  who  other  than  the  One  Creator  could  subjugate  the  sun  so  that  it  is  a 
servant of the  inhabitants of the earth? And who other than the Single One of Unity 
could take the wind in His hand entrusting it with a great many duties and employing 
it as a swift and agile servant on the face of the earth? And who apart from the Single 
One of Unity would have the ability to make fire a cook, and to cause a tiny flame the 
size of a match-head to consume thousands of tons of goods? And so on. Every single 
thing,  every  single  element,  every  single  heavenly  body,  points  to  the  All-Glorious 
One of Unity, at the degree of the majesty of dominicality. 

Thus, as divine unity is apparent in respect of glory and majesty, so bounty and 
munificence proclaim divine oneness in respect of beauty and mercy. This is because, 
within  this  all-embracing  art,  animate  creatures  and  especially  man  possess  the 
faculties  and  abilities  to  understand,  accept,  and  desire  the  infinite  varieties  of 
bounties, and to reflect all the divine names manifested in the universe. Simply, like a 
point of focus, man displays all the Beautiful Names together by means of his mirror-
like essence, and through it, proclaims God’s oneness. 

S e v e n t h  S e c t i o n : “His stamp on the former is on all things, universal 
and  particular,  while  His  seal  on  the  latter  is  on  the  body  and  on  the  limbs.”  Its 
meaning is this: just as the Glorious Maker has a mighty stamp on the macrocosm as a 
whole, so He has put a stamp of unity on each of its parts and species. And just as he 
has set the seal of unity on the face and body of each human being, the microcosm, so 
on each of their limbs is a seal of His unity. 

Indeed,  the All-Powerful  One  of  Glory  has  placed on  everything,  on  universals 
and on particulars, on stars and on particles, a stamp of unity which bears witness to 
Him. On each he has set a seal of unity which points to Him. This greatest of truths 
having  been  elucidated  and  proved  most  brilliantly  and  decisively  in  the  Twenty-
Second Word, the Thirty-Second Word, and the Thirty-Three Windows of the Thirty-
Third Letter, we refer you to those and cutting short the discussion, conclude it here.  

THE FIFTH PHRASE:  “His is the praise” 

Since  the  perfections  found  in  all  being,  which  are  the  cause  of  acclaim  and 
tribute, are His, praise too belongs to Him. All acclaim and laudation belongs to Him, 
from  whomever  to  whomever  it  has  come  and  will  come  from  pre-eternity  to  post-
eternity. For bounty, munificence, perfection, and  

 

 

276

277

beauty, which are the causes of acclaim, and everything that gives rise to praise, are 
His,  they  belong  to  Him.  Indeed,  as  the  Qur’an  indicates,  worship,  glorification, 
prostration,  supplication,  and  praise  and  laudation  rise  continuously,  unceasingly, 
from all beings to the divine court. The following is a comprehensive proof which sets 
forth this truth affirming divine unity. 

When  we  look  at  the  universe,  it  appears  to  us  in  the  form  of  a  park  set  with 
gardens,  its  roof  gilded  with lofty  stars,  its  ground  inhabited  by  ornamented beings. 
When we see it thus, we observe that the orderly, luminous, lofty heavenly bodies and 
purposive, ornamented earthly beings in this park are all saying, each in its particular 
tongue: “We are the miracles of power of an All-Powerful One of Glory; we testify to 
the unity of an All-Wise Creator, an Omnipotent Maker.” 

Then we look at the globe of the earth within the park of the universe and we see 
it in the form of a garden in which uncountable varieties of multicoloured, beautifully 
adorned flowering plants  have been laid out and through which innumerable species 
of  animals  have  been  scattered. In  this  garden  of  the  earth,  all  these  adorned plants 
and  decorated  animals  proclaim  through  their  well-ordered  forms  and  balanced 
shapes: “We are each of us a miracle, a wonder of art, created by a Single All-Wise 
Maker; each of us heralds His unity and is a witness to His unity.”  

Moreover, looking at the trees in the garden, we see fruits and flowers in various 
forms which have been made knowingly, wisely,  generously, subtly, and beautifully 
to the utmost degree. And they are proclaiming unanimously: “We are the miraculous 
gifts  of  a  Compassionate  One  of  Beauty,  a  Merciful  One  of  Perfection;  we  are 
wondrous bounties.” 

Thus, the heavenly bodies and beings in the park of the universe, and the plants 
and  animals  in  the  garden  of  the  earth,  and  the  blossom  and  fruits  on  its  trees  and 
plants,  testify  and  proclaim  in  an  infinitely  resounding  voice:  “Our  Creator  and 
Fashioner,  the  All-Powerful  One  of  Beauty,  the  Peerless  All-Wise  One,  the  All-
Generous Granter of Favours, who bestowed us as gifts,  is powerful over all things. 
Nothing at all is difficult for Him. Nothing at all is outside the bounds of His power. 
In relation to His power minute particles and stars are equal. A universal is as simple 
as a particular, while a particular is as valuable as a universal. The largest is as easy as 
the  smallest  in  relation  to  His  power,  and  the  small  is  as  full  of  art  as  the  large; 
indeed, as far as art is concerned, the small is greater than the large. 

“All the occurrences of the past, which are wonders of His power, testify that that 

Absolutely Powerful One is also powerful over the wonders of  

 

 

277

278

the  future  and  its  contingencies.  Just  as  the  one  who  brought  about  yesterday  will 
bring about tomorrow, so the All-Powerful One who created the past will also create 
the future. The All-Wise Maker who made this world, will also make the hereafter. 

“Yes,  just  as  the  All-Powerful  One  of  Glory  is  the  only  one  truly  deserving  of 
worship; so He is the only one deserving of praise. Just as worship is exclusively His, 
so are praise and laudation His alone.” 

Is it at all possible that an All-Wise Maker who created the heavens and the earth 
would leave without purpose human beings, who are their most important result and 
the  most  perfect  fruit  of  the  universe?  Is  it  at  all  possible  that  He  would  hand  them 
over  to  causes  and  chance,  that  He  would  transform  His  self-evident  wisdom  into 
futility? God forbid! Is it at all possible that having planned then formed a tree, giving 
it  the  utmost  importance,  and  having  administered  it  and  raised  it  with  the  greatest 
wisdom,  someone who  was  wise  and  knowing  would  ignore  its  fruits,  which  are  its 
aim and purpose? Would he attach no importance to them, and leave them either for 
thieves  or  to  rot  scattered  on  the  ground?  Of  course  it  would  be  impossible.  It  is 
because of its fruit that the tree is given importance. 

Now, man is the intelligent being of the universe and its most perfect fruit, result, 
and  aim.  Is  it  possible  that  the  universe’s  All-Wise  Maker  would  give  to  others  the 
praise  and  worship,  and  thanks  and  love,  which  are  the  fruits  of  its  intelligent  and 
conscious  fruits,  thus  causing  His  self-evident  wisdom  to  be  nullified,  His  absolute 
power  transformed  into  impotence,  and  His  all-encompassing  knowledge  converted 
into ignorance? God forbid! A hundred thousand times! 

Since  intelligent beings are the pivot of the dominical aims  in the palace of the 
universe, and man is the most eminent of intelligent beings, is it at all possible that the 
thanks  and  worship  he  offers  in  response  to  the  bounties  he  receives  should  go  to 
anyone other than the palace’s Maker, and that the Glorious Maker would permit the 
thanks and worship due to Him, which are the ultimate aim of man’s creation, to go to 
another? 

Moreover,  is  it  at  all  possible  that  He  would  make Himself  loved  by  intelligent 
beings through the endless varieties of His bounties, and that He would make Himself 
known  to  them  through  the  innumerable miracles  of  His  art,  and  then,  attaching  no 
importance  to  them,  abandon  to  causes  and  nature  their  thanks  and  worship,  their 
praise  and  love,  their  recognition  and  gratitude.  Is  it  at  all  possible  that  He  would 
make His absolute wisdom denied and the sovereignty of His dominicality nullified? 
God forbid! A hundred thousand times, God forbid! 

Is it at all possible that one who cannot create a spring, and cannot  

 

 

278

279

create all fruits, and cannot create all the apples on earth, the stamp on which is the 
same, could create one apple, which is a miniature specimen of all of them, and give it 
to  someone  to  eat  as  a bounty?  Is  it  possible  that  he  should  claim thanks  for  it  and 
thus share in the praise due to the one absolutely deserving of praise? God forbid! For 
whoever  creates  one  apple  is  he  who  creates  all  the  apples  produced  in  the  whole 
world; for their stamp is the same. 

Moreover,  whoever  creates  all  the  apples  is  again  the  one  who  creates  all  the 
seeds and fruits in the world, which are the source of food. That is to say, the one who 
gives  the  tiniest  bounty  to  the  least  significant  animate  creature  is  directly  the 
universe’s  Creator  and  its  Glorious  Provider.  Since  this  is  so,  thanks  and  praise  are 
His directly. Since this is so, the reality of the universe declares unceasingly with the 
tongue of truth: “All the praise offered by all beings from pre-eternity to post-eternity 
is due to Him alone!” 

THE SIXTH PHRASE:  “He grants life” 

That  is,  it  is  He  alone  who  gives  life,  in  which  case  it  is  also  He  alone  who 
creates all things. For life is the spirit, light, leaven, foundation, result, and summary 
of the universe, so whoever grants life must also be the universe’s Creator. It must be 
He who grants life, then, the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One. We therefore point 
out as follows a mighty proof of this degree of the affirmation of divine unity: 

As  has  been  explained  and  proved  in  another  part  of  the  Risale-i  Nur,  we  see 
before us the magnificent army of animate beings with their tents pitched on the plain 
of the face of the earth. Every spring we behold a new army emerging from the World 
of the  Unseen, freshly  mobilized; one of the  innumerable armies of the Ever-Living 
and  Self-Subsistent  One.  Observing  this  army,  we  see  within  it  more  than  two 
hundred  thousand  different  nations  from  the  plant  families,  and  more  than  one 
hundred  thousand  from  the  animal  tribes.  Although  the  uniforms  of  each  tribe  and 
family, as well as their provisions, drill, discharge, arms, and period of service are all 
different, anyone who has eyes in his head will see, and having seen will be unable to 
deny,  that  a  commander-in-chief  provides  all  these  different  needs  with  perfect 
orderliness and precise balance at exactly the right time; and he does this through his 
infinite  power  and  wisdom, his  boundless  knowledge  and  will,  his  unending  mercy, 
his  inexhaustible treasuries, without forgetting a single one of them, or confusing or 
mixing-up or delaying any of them. 

Is it at all possible, then, that anything could meddle, interfere, or have a  

 

 

279

280

share  in  this  giving  of  life  and  administering,  in  this  nurturing  and  sustaining,  other 
than  one  who  possesses  knowledge  comprehensive  enough  to  encompass  the  army 
together  with  all  of  its  affairs,  and  the  absolute  power  to  manage  it  in  addition  to 
providing all its necessities? God forbid! A hundred thousand times! 

It is obvious that if there are ten tribes in one battalion, impotent human beings 
would  be  compelled  to  equip  them  in  a  single  fashion  because  to  equip  them  all 
separately would be as difficult as equipping ten battalions. The Ever-Living and Self-
Subsistent One, however, provides the equipment necessary for the lives of the more 
than  three  hundred  thousand  different  tribes  within  that  magnificent  army.  And  He 
does  this  with  no  trouble or difficulty,  in  a  light  and  easy  manner,  most  wisely  and 
maintaining orderliness. He causes the mighty army to declare with one tongue: “It is 
He Who gives life,”(23:80) and the vast congregation in the mosque of the universe to 
recite: 

God, there is no god save Him, the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One. Neither 
slumber overtakes  Him  nor  sleep.  His  is  all that  is  in  the  heavens  and all that  is  on 
earth. Who is there that could intercede with Him, except by His leave? He knows all 
that lies open before men and all that is hidden from them, whereas they cannot attain 
to  aught  of  His  knowledge  save  that  which  He  wills.  His  Throne  extends  over  the 
heavens and the earth, and He feels no weariness in preserving them. And He alone is 
Truly Exalted, Tremendous.(2:255) 

THE SEVENTH PHRASE:  “And deals death” 

It is He who causes death. That is, just as it is He who grants life, so it is again He 
who takes  life  and grants death. Indeed, death is  not only destruction and extinction 
that it may be attributed to causes or nature. Just as a seed superficially dies and rots 
while inside it a shoot is being kneaded and is coming to life, that is, it is passing from 
the particular life of a seed to the universal life of a shoot; so too, although death  is 
apparently disintegration and banishment,  in reality, for human beings  it  is the sign, 
introduction,  and  starting  point  of  perpetual  life.  In  which  case,  the  Absolutely 
Powerful One who grants and administers life must certainly be the One who creates 
death.  The  following  points  to  a  mighty  proof  of  this,  the  greatest  degree  of  the 
affirmation of divine unity, contained in this phrase. 

As is explained in the Twenty-Fourth Window of the Thirty-Third Letter, through 
divine  will,  all  beings  are  flowing.  At  its  Sustainer’s  command,  the  universe  is  in 
continuous motion. With divine permission, all creatures  

 

 

280

281

are unceasingly flowing in the river of time; they are being sent from the World of the 
Unseen; they are being clothed in external existence in the Manifest world; then they 
are being poured in orderly fashion into the World of the Unseen, and it is there that 
they  alight.  At  their  Sustainer’s  command,  they  continuously  come  from the  future, 
stop by in passing pausing for a breath, and are poured into the past. 

This  flood  of  creatures  is  being  made  from  top  to  bottom  with  instances  of 
wisdom,  benefits,  results,  and  aims  within  the  sphere  of  a  most  wise  mercy  and 
munificence; as is this constant travelling, within the sphere of a most knowledgeable 
wisdom and orderliness; and this current, within the sphere of a most compassionate 
solicitude and equilibrium. That is to say, an All-Powerful One of Glory, an All-Wise 
One of Perfection, is continuously giving life to and employing the families of beings, 
and the individuals within each family, and the worlds that those families form. Then, 
with  His  wisdom  He  discharges  them,  manifests  death  and  despatches  them  to  the 
World  of  the  Unseen.  He  transfers  them  from  the  realm  of  power  to  the  realm  of 
knowledge. 

Is it then at all possible that one who does not have the ability to administer the 
universe  in  its  totality,  whose  authority  does  not  stretch  throughout  time,  whose 
power  is  not  sufficient  to  make  the  world  manifest  life  and  death  like  a  single 
individual,  who  cannot  bestow  life  on  the  spring  as  though  it  were  a  single  flower, 
attach it to the face of the earth and then pluck it from it with death and gather it up, 
could such a one be the owner of death and the granter of death? Yes, the death of the 
lowliest animate being, even, like its life, must necessarily occur according to the law 
of the Glorious One in whose hand are all the truths of life and varieties of death, and 
with  His  permission,  and  at  His  command,  and  through  His  power,  and  with  His 
knowledge. 

THE EIGHTH PHRASE:  “And He is living and dies not” 

That  is,  His  life  is  perpetual,  it  is  pre-eternal  and  post-eternal.  Death  and 
evanescence,  non-existence  and  cessation,  cannot  befall  Him.  He  who  is  pre-eternal 
must  certainly  be  post-eternal.  He  who  is  sempiternal  must  certainly  be  eternally 
enduring. He who is necessarily existent, must certainly be without beginning or end. 
How could non-existence touch a life of which all existence, in all its varieties, is its 
shadow? Non-existence and ephemerality and cessation could in no way encroach on 
a life through whose manifestation all lives continuously come into being, on which 
all the stable truths of the universe are dependent, and through which they subsist. 

 

 

281

282

Yes,  one  flash of  that  life’s  manifestation  accords  a  unity  to  the multiplicity  of 
things,  all  of  which  are  subject  to  decline  and  decease,  and  makes  them  display 
permanence; it saves them from dispersal, preserves their existence, manifests in them 
a  sort  of  continuance.  That  is,  life  accords  a  unity  to  multiplicity;  it  makes  it 
permanent.  If  life  departs,  the  unity  disintegrates,  it  ceases.  Most  certainly, 
ephemerality  and  transience  cannot  impinge  on  that  necessary  life,  from  a  single 
manifestation of which all those innumerable flashes of life proceed. 

Decisive  witnesses  to  this  truth  are  the  transience  and  ephemerality  of  the 
universe. That is, through their existence and lives,4 beings bear witness to and point 
to the life of the Undying Ever-Living One and to the necessary existence of His life, 
and through their deaths and their ephemerality they bear witness to and point to the 
perpetuity of His life and its eternity. For the fact that on the demise of beings  others 
follow on after them, manifesting life like them and taking their places, demonstrates 
that 
life’s 
there 
manifestation. 

living  being  who  continuously  renews 

is  an  unceasingly 

Bubbles on the surface of a flowing river sparkle in the sun and disappear. Troop 
after troop of bubbles appear, following on one after another. They display the same 
sparkle,  are  extinguished  and vanish.  Sparkling  and  being  extinguished in  this  way, 
they point to the continuance of an elevated, enduring sun. Similarly, the alternation 
of  life  and  death  in  these  constantly  moving  beings  testifies  to  the  continuance  and 
perpetualness of an Ever-Living Ever-Enduring One. 

Yes, beings are mirrors. As darkness is the mirror to light, showing up the light’s 
brilliance to the degree of its intensity, so due to the contrast of opposites beings act 
as mirrors in many respects. For example, beings act as mirrors to the Maker’s power 
through their impotence and to His riches through their poverty; similarly, they act as 
mirrors  to  His  everlastingness  through  their  ephemerality.  Through  their  povert  in 
wintertime  and  glittering  wealth  and  riches  in  springtime,  trees  and  the  face  of  the 
earth  act  as  mirrors  in  most  unequivocal  fashion  to  the  power  and  mercy  of  an 
Absolutely  Powerful One, a Possessor of Absolute Riches. It is  as though all things 
are making  supplication together with  Uways  al-Qarani through the tongues of their 
beings, and are saying: 

                                                 
4 When the Prophet Abraham (Upon whom be peace) referred the subject of the rising and setting of 
the sun in his debate with Nimrod to life and death,* it was a transition and progress from a particular 
meaning of the giving of life and death to a universal meaning. It demonstrates the most illuminating 
and widest sphere of the proof, and does not, as some commentators on the Qur’an have asserted, 
abandon the hidden proof for the obvious one. 
* See, Qur’an, 2:258. 

282

 

 

283

“O God! You are our Sustainer, for we are mere slaves; we are powerless to 
sustain and raise ourselves. That is to say, the One who sustains us is You! 
And it is You who is the Creator, for we are creatures, we are being made! 
And it is You who is the Provider, for we are in need of provision, we have 
no  power!  That  is  to  say,  the  One  who  creates  us  and  bestows  on  us  our 
provisions  is  You!  And  it  is  You who  is  the  Owner,  because  we  are  totally 
owned property; someone other than us has power of disposal over us. That 
is to say, it is You who is our Owner! And You, You are Mighty! You possess 
grandeur and sublimity! As for us we look to our baseness and see that on us 
are  manifestations  of a mightiness.  That  is  to  say,  we are  mirrors  to  Your 
mightiness!  And  it  is  You  who  possesses  Absolute  Riches,  because  we  are 
utterly wanting and riches are bestowed on us that our indigent hands could 
not obtain. That is to say, it is You who is rich, the One who gives is You! 
And  You,  You  are  Ever-Living,  Ever-Enduring,  because  we,  we  are  dying, 
and in our dying and in our being resurrected we see the manifestation of a 
perpetual  giver  of  life!  Yes,  You,  You  are  Ever-Enduring,  because  we  see 
Your continuation and perpetualness in our demise and transience! And the 
One who responds to us and answers us, the Granter of Gifts is You. For all 
of us beings, we are ever crying out and requesting, entreating, imploring by 
tongue  and  by  state.  And  our  desires  are  brought  about,  our  aims  are 
achieved. In other words, the One who answers us is You!...” And so on. 

All creatures, universal and particular, act as mirrors in a way that, like Uways al-
Qarani,  has  the  meaning  of  supplication.  All  proclaim  divine  power  and  perfection 
through their impotence and poverty and deficiency. 

THE NINTH PHRASE:  “All good is in His hand”  

That is to say, all good things are in His hand, all good deeds are in His account 
book,  all  beneficence  is  in  His  treasury.  Since  this  is  so,  those  desiring  good  must 
seek  it  from  Him,  those  wishing  for  what  is  best  must  beseech  Him.  In  order  to 
demonstrate the truth of this phrase conclusively, we shall point out signs and flashes 
from one of the many far-reaching evidences of divine knowledge, as follows: 

The  Maker  who  controls  and  creates  with  the  acts  that  are  apparent  in  the 
universe  has  all-encompassing  knowledge,  and  such  knowledge  is  His  particular, 
inherent  and  necessary  quality.  Its  separation  from  Him  is  impossible.  In  the  same 
way that it is not possible for the sun to exist but for its light not to exist, it is also not 
possible, though thousands of times  

 

 

283

284

more so, for the knowledge of the Being who creates these well-ordered beings to be 
separated from Him. 

Such  all-comprehending  knowledge  is  necessary  to  that  Being;  it  is  also 
necessary to all things in so far as they are connected to Him. That is to say, it is not 
possible for anything to be hidden from Him. Just as it is not possible for objects on 
the face of the earth to face the sun with no barrier and not see it, so is it a thousand 
times less possible, it is impossible, for things to be hidden from the light of the All-
Knowing One of Glory’s knowledge. For they are in his presence. That is, everything 
is  within  the  range  of  His  sight,  is  before  Him,  is  within  the  compass  of  His 
witnessing; He penetrates into all things. 

If such possessors of light as the inanimate sun, impotent man, and unconscious 
X-rays can see and penetrate everything that faces them although they are contingent, 
defective and accidental, surely  nothing at all can remain  hidden from or be beyond 
the  light  of  pre-eternal  knowledge,  which  is  necessary,  all-encompassing,  and 
essential. The universe contains incalculable signs and marks pointing to this truth, as 
may be seen in the following examples: 

All the instances of wisdom apparent in beings point to such knowledge. For He 
who performs His works kindly and graciously must know; He must know what He is 
doing.  And  all  well-ordered  beings,  each  with  balance,  and  all  finely  balanced  and 
measured  shapes  and  forms,  each  with  order,  also  indicate  such  all-encompassing 
knowledge. For to carry out work with wisdom means to do it with knowledge. And 
all favour and adornment point to such knowledge. For he who works skilfully and in 
a  measured  and  balanced  way  is  surely  relying  on  a  powerful  knowledge.  And  the 
regular measuredness apparent in beings, their shapes cut out with a view to purposes 
and benefits, and the fruitful situations and assemblages as though arranged according 
the  principles  of  divine  decree  and  the  compasses  of  divine  determining,  all 
demonstrate an all-embracing knowledge. For sure, it is by virtue of all-encompassing 
knowledge that each thing  is  given  an ordered, distinct form, as well as  a particular 
shape that is appropriate and beneficial to its life and existence; it could not occur any 
other way. 

Also, it is only through all-embracing knowledge that the sustenance of animate 
creatures  is  provided  in  a  suitable  form,  at  the  appropriate  time,  from  unexpected 
places. Because, since the One who sends the sustenance knows and recognizes those 
who are in need of it, and the appropriate time to send it, and perceives their need, He 
is able to provide their sustenance in a suitable form. 

 

 

284

285

Also,  although  it  is  not clear  to the creatures  themselves, the  appointed  hour of 
their  deaths,  which  is  tied to  a  law  of determination,  demonstrates  a  comprehensive 
knowledge. For although  its time does not appear to be determined, the death of all 
groups and individuals is appointed within a period of time with a beginning and an 
end. The fact that the seeds, fruits and results of a thing are preserved at the time of 
death,  since  they  will  continue  its  duties  after  it  and  are  the  means  of  its 
transformation into a new life, demonstrates an all-encompassing knowledge. 

Also,  mercy’s  benevolence,  which  encompasses  all  beings  and  is  in  a  form 
appropriate  to  each,  demonstrates  all-embracing  knowledge  within  vast  mercy.  For 
the  One  who  feeds  the  offspring  of  animate  creatures  with  milk,  for  example,  and 
assists  the  plants  of  the  earth  needy  for  water  with  rain,  most  certainly  knows  the 
young and their needs, and sees the plants, perceives how necessary rain is for them 
and then sends it; and so on. All the manifestations of wise kindly mercy demonstrate 
all-comprehensive knowledge. 

Also, the care and attention, the artistic fashioning and skilful decoration and art 
in all things demonstrate all-embracing knowledge. For it is only through a profound 
knowledge that an orderly, adorned, artistic, and purposeful state can be chosen from 
among  thousands  of  possible  states.  The choice  apparent  in  all  beings  demonstrates 
all-encompassing knowledge. 

Also,  the  total  ease  in  the  creation  and  origination  of  things  points  to  perfect 
knowledge. For the facility in achieving a certain situation is commensurate with the 
degree of knowledge and skill. However well it is known, it will be achieved with that 
degree of ease. Thus, we see that beings, every one of which  is a miracle of art, are 
created easily, without trouble or confusion, in a short period of time, in a wondrous, 
yet  miraculous,  fashion.  That  is  to  say,  there  is  infinite  knowledge,  since  it  finds 
expression through infinite ease; and so on. 

There  are  thousands  of  veracious  signs  like  those  mentioned  in  the  examples 
above indicating that the Being who has free disposal over the universe possesses all-
encompassing knowledge; that He knows all the attributes of all beings, then he acts. 
Since the universe’s Owner has such a knowledge, He surely sees human beings and 
their actions, and He  knows what human beings  deserve and what is appropriate for 
them.  And  He  deals  with  them  and  will  deal  with  them  in  accordance  with  the 
requirements of wisdom and mercy. 

O man! Come to your senses! Think carefully of just what sort of Being it is who 

knows you and watches you; think of it and pull yourself together! 

 

 

285

286

I f  i t  i s  a s k e d :  Knowledge alone is not sufficient; will is also necessary. If 

there were no will, knowledge would be insufficient, wouldn’t it? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  All  beings  both  indicate  and  testify  to  all-encompassing 
knowledge,  and  they  point  to  the  comprehensive  will  of  the  one  possessing  that 
knowledge. It is as follows: 

While hesitating among great numbers of possibilities, an ordered individuality is 
given  to  all  things,  especially  to  animate  beings,  through  a  determined  probability 
from among a great host of muddled probabilities, and through a productive way from 
among a great many fruitless ways. This demonstrates a universal will of many facets. 
Measured  shapes  and  well-ordered  identities  have  been  given  to  all  things  in  a 
most  sensitive,  delicate  measure  and  with  a  most  fine  and  subtle  order.  They  have 
been given these from among the inanimate elements which flow without balance in 
confused, monotonous floods, and from among the barren, fruitless paths and endless 
possibilities that surround all beings. This necessarily and self-evidently demonstrates 
that  they  are  the  works  of  a  comprehensive  will.  For  choosing  innumerable  states 
occurs by means of a designation, a choice, a purpose, and a will. Deliberate intention 
and desire specify them. Specifying requires a specifier and choice requires a chooser. 
And that specifier and chooser is will. 

For  example,  the  creation  of  a  being  like  man,  who  resembles  a  machine 
assembled from hundreds of different components and systems, from a drop of water; 
and the creation of a bird with its hundreds of different members out of a simple egg; 
and the creation of a tree, which is separated into hundreds of different parts, out of a 
simple  seed  –  the  creation  of  these  testify  to  power  and  knowledge,  just  as  they 
indicate decisively and necessarily their Maker’s universal will. And with that will He 
gives a distinct, particular shape to every component, every member, every part. He 
clothes them in a chosen state. 

I n  S h o r t :  Just as there are between different things many resemblances and 
coincidences  with  regard  to  their  essentials  and  results,  for  example,  between  the 
major  members  and  organs  of  animals’  bodies,  and  they  display  a  single  stamp  of 
unity, indicating decisively that all animals have the same Maker who is One, Single, 
and possesses Unity; so too the different identities and distinct features of the animals, 
all determined in accordance with wisdom and purpose, shows that their Single Maker 
acts  with  choice  and  will.  He  does  what  He  wishes  to  do,  He  does  not do  what  He 
does not wish to do; He acts with intention and will. 

There  are  as  many  indications  of  and  attestations  to  divine  knowledge  and 

dominical will as there are beings, indeed as the beings’ attributes and  

 

 

286

287

qualities. Therefore, some philosophers denying  divine will, and some of those who 
favour  innovation  denying  divine  determining,  and  some  of  the  people  of 
misguidance  claiming  that  God  is  not  concerned  with  minor  matters,  and  the 
naturalists  attributing  some  things  to  nature  and  causes,  are  lies  multiplied  to  the 
number of beings and a lunacy of misguidance compounded to the  number of those 
beings’  attributes.  For  whoever  denies  the  innumerable  instances  of  their  veracious 
witnessing is telling a lie of infinite proportions. 

So,  you can see for  yourself  just how mistaken and contrary to the truth it  is to 
say  of  events,  all  of  which  come  into  existence  through  divine  will,  “Naturally, 
naturally,” instead of, “God willing, God willing.” 

THE TENTH PHRASE:  “And He is powerful over all things” 

That is to say, absolutely nothing at all is difficult for Him. However many things 
there  are  in  the  sphere  of  contingency,  He  is  able  to  clothe  all  of them  in  existence 
most easily. It is so simple and easy for Him that according to the meaning of, 

His command is only, when He wills a thing to be, He but says to it, “Be!” 
and it is, (36:82) 

He only has to command and it is done. 

As soon as a skilful artist puts his hand to his work, it functions smoothly like a 
machine. One could say in order to express his speed and skill, that the work of art is 
so  closely  under  his  control  that  it  is  as  if  at  his  command,  at  his  touch,  the  pieces 
appear, the works of art come into existence. In the same way, the verse states: “His 
command  is  only,  when  He  wills  a  thing  to  be,  He  but  says  to  it  ‘Be!’,  and  it  is,” 
alluding  to  the  absolute  subjugation  and  obedience  of  all  things  to  the  power of the 
All-Powerful One of Glory, and the absolute ease and lack of trouble with which His 
power functions. We shall elucidate in five points five of the innumerable mysteries 
contained in this mighty truth. 

T h e  F i r s t 

In  relation  to  divine  power  the  greatest  thing  is  as  easy  as  the  smallest.  The 
creation of a species with all of its members is as easy and trouble-free as the creation 
of a single member. It is as easy to create Paradise as the spring and it is as easy to 
create the spring as a flower. 

This  mystery  has  been  explained  and  proved  with  the  six  comparisons  –  the 
Mystery of Luminosity, the Mystery of Transparency, the Mystery of Reciprocity, the 
Mystery  of  Balance,  the  Mystery  of  Order,  the  Mystery  of  Obedience,  and  the 
Mystery of Disengagedness – at the end of the Tenth  

 

 

287

288

Word, which is about the resurrection of the dead, and in the discussion also about the 
resurrection in the Second Aim of the Twenty-Ninth Word, which is about the angels, 
the immortality of man’s spirit, and the resurrection. It has been demonstrated in these 
that  in  relation  to  divine  power  the  stars  are  as  easy  as  atoms  and  that  innumerable 
individuals  are  created  as  easily  as  one  individual.  Since  these  mysteries  have been 
proved in those two Words, we refer you to them and cut short the discussion here. 

T h e  S e c o n d 

A decisive, self-evident proof that everything is equal in relation to divine power 
is  this:  we  see  with  our  own  eyes  in  the  creation  of  animals  and  plants  the  highest 
degree  of  mastery  and  exquisiteness  of  art  despite  the  infinite  multiplicity  and 
liberality; and the greatest distinction and differentiation within the utmost confusion 
and intermingling; and the highest worth as regards art and supreme beauty as regards 
creation within the greatest abundance and profusion. While needing much equipment 
and much time, they are created with the utmost ease and speed with the greatest art. 
Simply, those miracles of art come into existence suddenly and out of nothing. 

Thus, by observing this activity of power every  season on the  face of the earth, 
we see that it establishes irrefutably that the greatest thing is as easy as the smallest in 
relation  to  the  power  that  is  the  source  of  those  actions,  and  that  the  creation  and 
administration of innumerable individuals is as easy as the creation and administration 
of a single individual. 

T h e  T h i r d 

The  vastest  whole  is as easy  as the  smallest part in relation to the power of the 
All-Powerful  Maker  who  rules  in  the  universe  with  actions,  direction,  and  disposal 
that are clearly to be seen. The creation of a universal consisting of a multiplicity of 
individuals  is  as  easy  as  the  creation  of  a  single  particular,  and  in  an  insignificant 
particular, art of the highest worth may be displayed. This mystery and the wisdom in 
it arise from three sources: 

Firstly: from the assistance of unity (vâhidiyet). 
Secondly: from the facility of unity (vahdet). 
Thirdly: from the manifestation of oneness (ehadiyet). 
The Assistance of Unity, which is the first source: That is, if all things are the 
property of a single being, then as a result of unity, he can concentrate the power of 
all things behind any single thing and all can be administered as easily as one thing. 
We  shall  explain  this  mystery  with  a  comparison  in  order  to  make  it  easier  to 
understand: 

 

 

288

289

For  example,  if  a  country  has  a  single  ruler,  by  reason  of  the  law  of  his  sole 
sovereignty (vahdet-i saltanat), he is able to mobilize the moral strength of the whole 
army behind every single soldier. And because he is able to do this, a single soldier is 
able  to  capture  a  king  and  have  command  over  him  in  the  name  of  his  monarch. 
Furthermore, just as the monarch may employ and direct a single soldier and a single 
official, by reason of the mystery of  sole sovereignty,  he  is able to direct the whole 
army and all his officials. It is as if, by reason of the mystery of sole sovereignty, he is 
able to send everyone, everything, to the assistance of one individual.  

Every  single  individual,  therefore,  will  rely  on  the  combined  strength  of  all  the 
individuals;  that  is,  each  will  receive  assistance  from  all.  If  the  rope  of  sole 
sovereignty  were  to  be  unfastened  and  they  become  irregular  soldiers,  then  each 
soldier,  suddenly  losing  a  boundless  strength,  would  fall  from  a  high  position  of 
influence to that of a common man. And to command and employ them would beget 
difficulties to the number of individuals. 

In exactly the same way, “And God’s is the highest similitude,”(16:60) since the 
universe’s  Maker  is  One,  He  assembles  His  names,  which  look  to  all  things, before 
each single thing, and He creates with infinite art, in a valuable way. If there is need 
for it, He looks to a single thing by means of all things, He causes them to look to it; 
He  gives  assistance and  strengthens  it.  Also,  by  reason  of  the  mystery  of  unity,  He 
creates, disposes, and administers all things as though they were a single thing. 

It  is  due  to the  mystery  of this  assistance  of unity  that  in  the  universe  a  certain 
quality is apparent which is exalted and sublime to the utmost degree as regards its art 
and value, and this within the utmost abundance and profusion. 

The Facility of Unity, which is the second source: that is, matters which occur 
according to the principles of unity,  in one centre, from one  hand, according to one 
law,  occur  with  the  greatest  ease.  If  they  are  distributed  among  numerous  centres, 
numerous laws, and numerous hands, it engenders difficulties. 

For example, if the equipment of all the  soldiers  of an army  is manufactured in 
one centre, according to one law, and at the command of one commander-in-chief, it 
is as easy as equipping one soldier. If on the other hand, all their equipment is made in 
different  factories,  in  different  centres,  then  all  the  military  factories  necessary  to 
equip  an  army  are  necessary  to  equip  one  soldier.  That  is  to  say,  if  unity  is  relied 
upon,  an  army  is  as  easy  as  a  single  soldier.  Whereas,  if  there  is  no  unity,  as  many 
difficulties arise in equipping one soldier as in equipping an army. 

 

 

289

290

Furthermore, if with regard to unity, the elements necessary for life are given to a 
tree’s fruits, relying on one centre, one  law, and one root, thousands of fruits are  as 
easy as a single fruit. If, on the other hand, each fruit is bound to a different centre and 
all  their  vital  necessities  are  sent  to  them  separately,  each  fruit  will  give  rise  to  as 
many  difficulties  as  the  whole  tree.  For  the  elements  necessary  for  the  life  of  the 
whole tree will be necessary for each fruit. 

Thus, like these two comparisons, “And God’s is the highest similitude,”(16:60) 
because the universe’s Maker is the Single One of Unity, He acts with unity (vahdet), 
and because He acts with unity all things are as  easy as one thing. Moreover, He  is 
able to  make  a  single  thing  as  valuable  as all  things  as  regards  its  art.  And  creating 
innumerable individuals in a most valuable form, He demonstrates absolute liberality 
through the tongue of the limitless abundance and endless profusion of beings, and He 
manifests boundless generosity and infinite creativity. 

The Manifestation of Oneness, which is the third source: that is, since the All-
Glorious  Maker  is  not  physical  or  corporeal,  time  and  space  cannot  restrict  Him, 
creation  and place  cannot obtrude on  His  presence  and  witnessing,  means  and  mass 
cannot  veil  His  actions.  There  is  no  fragmentation  or  division  in  His  regarding  and 
acting  towards  creation.  One  thing  cannot  be  an  obstacle  to  another.  He  performs 
innumerable acts as though they were a  single act. For this reason,  in the same way 
that, as far as its meaning is concerned, a huge tree can be encapsulated in a seed, a 
world also  can  be contained  within  a  single  individual,  and  the  whole  world  can  be 
encompassed by the Hand of Power. 

We have explained this mystery in others of the Words like this: the sun is to an 
extent  unrestricted  with  regard  to  its  luminosity,  so  its  image  is  reflected  in  every 
burnished and shining object. If thousands and millions of mirrors are exposed to its 
light, the manifestation of its likeness will be found in each one of them without being 
divided. If the capacities of the mirrors are such, the sun will be able to demonstrate 
its effects in them in all their magnitude. One thing will not be an obstacle to another. 
Thousands of things will enter thousands of places with the ease of one thing entering 
one  place.  Each  place  will  display  the  sun’s  manifestation  as  much  as thousands  of 
places display it. 

Thus,  “And  God’s  is  the  highest  similitude,”(16:60)  the  manifestation  of  the 
universe’s All-Glorious Maker is such, with all His attributes which are light and with 
all His names which are luminous, that through the mystery of the regard of oneness, 
although He is not in any place, He is all-present and all-seeing in all places. There is 
no division in His regarding and acting  

 

 

290

291

towards the creation. He performs every task at the same time, in all places, without 
difficulty, without hindrance.  

Thus, it is through these mysteries of the assistance of unity, facility of unity, and 
manifestation  of  oneness,  that  when  all  beings  are  attributed  to  a  single  Maker,  the 
creation of all of them becomes as simple and easy as that of a single being. And each 
being can be as valuable as all beings as regards the fineness of its art. This truth is 
demonstrated  by  there  being  within  the  boundless  plenitude  of  beings  endless 
subtleties  of  art  in  every  one  of  them.  If  the  beings  are  not  attributed  directly  to  a 
single  Maker,  each  becomes  as  problematical  as  all  beings  and  the  value  of  all  of 
them  decreases,  it  falls  to  that  of  a  single  being.  If  it  were  the  case,  either  nothing 
would come into existence, or if it did, it would be without value, worthless. 

This  mystery  led  the  Sophists,  who  were  the  most  advanced  philosophers,  to 
realize that the path of associating partners with God was infinitely more difficult than 
the way of truth and path of affirming divine unity; that it was irrational to the utmost 
degree. So because they  had averted their faces from the way of truth and looked to 
that of unbelief and misguidance, they were compelled to renounce their reasons and 
deny the existence of everything. 

T h e  F o u r t h  

The  creation  of  Paradise  is  as  easy  as  that  of  the  spring  in  relation  to  the  All-
Powerful One’s power, who administers the universe with acts that are plain to see. 
The creation of spring is as easy as that of a flower. The loveliness of a flower’s art 
and  the  fineness  in  its  creation  may  be  as  beautiful  and valuable  as  the  spring.  The 
mystery of this truth is threefold: 

First: the necessity and total detachment of the Maker. 
Second: the complete otherness of His essence and His unrestrictedness. 
Third: His not being bound by space and His indivisibility. 
First  Mystery:  The  fact  that  necessity  and  total  detachment  give  rise  to  infinite 
ease and facility is an extremely profound mystery. We shall facilitate understanding 
of it with the following comparison: 

The  degrees  of  existence  are  different.  And  the  worlds  of  existence  are  all 
different.  Because  they  are  all  different,  a  particle  from  a  level  of  existence  that  is 
deeply  rooted  in  existence  is  as  great as  a mountain  from  a  less  substantial  level;  it 
contains the mountain.  

For example, the faculty of memory, which is the size of a mustard-seed in a head 
from the Manifest World, takes on an existence the size of a library from the World of 
Meaning. And a mirror the size of a fingernail  

 

 

291

292

from  the  external  world  encompasses  a  mighty  city  from  the  level  of  the  World  of 
Similitudes.  If  the  memory  and  the  mirror  from  the  external  world  had  possessed 
consciousness and creative power, they would have been able to bring about endless 
transformations  and  activity  in  the  Worlds  of  Meaning  and  Similitudes  through  the 
power of their minute existences in the external world. That is to say, when existence 
is firmly established, power increases; what is only a little becomes much. Especially 
if  having  acquired  complete  stability  existence  is  disengaged  and  detached  from 
materiality  and  is  not  restricted,  only  a  partial  manifestation  of  it  will  be  able  to 
transform many worlds of other less substantial levels of existence. 

Thus,  “And  God’s  is  the  highest  similitude,”(16:60)  the  universe’s  Glorious 
Maker is Necessarily Existent. That is, His existence is essential, it is pre-eternal and 
post-eternal, its non-existence is impossible, its cessation is impossible; it is the most 
firmly  rooted,  the  most  sound,  the  strongest,  and  the  most  perfect  of  the  levels  of 
existence. In relation to His existence, the other levels of existence are like extremely 
pale shadows.  

The degree of Necessary Existence is so stable and real, and contingent existence 
is so insubstantial and pale that many of those who have investigated creation, such as 
Muhyi  al-Din  al-‘Arabi,  have  relegated  the  other  levels  of  existence  to  the  level  of 
delusion and imagination; they said: “There is no existent save Him.” That is, things 
should not be ascribed existence relatively to the Necessary Existence. They asserted 
that they do not deserve to be called existent. 

Thus,  for  the  Necessarily  Existent  One’s  power,  which  is  both  necessary  and 
essential, contingent beings’ both created and accidental existences and both unstable 
and powerless realities are infinitely easy and simple. To raise all human beings to life 
and then judge them at the Great Gathering is as easy as resurrecting leaves, flowers 
and fruits in the spring, indeed, in a garden, or on a tree. 

Second Mystery: Easiness in regard to the complete otherness of His Essence and 
His  unrestrictedness  arises  from  this:  most  certainly, the  universe’s  Maker  is  not  of 
the  same  kind  as  the  universe.  His  Essence  resembles  no  other  essence  at  all. Since 
this is so, the obstacles and restraints within the sphere of the universe cannot hinder 
Him, they cannot restrict His actions. He has complete disposal over the universe and 
is  able  to  transform  all  of  it  at  the  same  time.  If  the  disposal  and  actions  that  are 
apparent in the universe were to be attributed to it, it would cause so many difficulties 
and such confusion that neither would any order remain nor would anything continue 
to exist; indeed, nothing would ever come into existence. 

 

 

292

293

For example, if the masterly art in vaulted domes is attributed to the stones of the 
domes, and if the command of a battalion, which properly belongs to its officer, is left 
to the soldiers, either neither of them would ever come into existence, or with  great 
difficulty  and  confusion  they  would  achieve  a  state  completely  lacking  in  order. 
Whereas,  if  in  order for  the  situation  of  the  stones  in  the  dome  to be  achieved, it  is 
accorded to a master who is not a stone himself, and if the command of the soldiers in 
the  regiment  is  referred  to  an  officer  who  possesses  the  essential  quality  of 
officership, both the art  is easy and the command and organization are easy. This  is 
because, while the stones and the soldiers are obstacles to each other, the master and 
the officer can look from every angle, they command without obstacle. 

Thus,  “And  God’s  is  the  highest  similitude,”(16:60)  the  sacred  Essence  of  the 
Necessarily Existent One is not of the same kind as contingent beings’ essences. All 
the  truths  of  the  universe  are  rays  from  the  name  of  Truth,  which  is  one  of  the 
Beautiful  Names  of  His  Essence.  Since  His  sacred  Essence  is  Necessarily  Existent 
and completely detached from materiality and different from all other essences, it has 
no like, no equivalent, no equal. So, most certainly, the administration and sustaining 
of the universe is as easy for that All-Glorious One’s pre-eternal power as that of the 
spring, indeed, of a tree; and the creation of the resurrection of the dead, the realm of 
the  hereafter, and Heaven and Hell, is as easy as the resurrection in  spring of a tree 
which had died the previous autumn. 

Third Mystery: The fact that indivisibility and not being bound by space result in 
the  utmost  facility  has  this  meaning:  since  the  All-Powerful  Maker  is  free  of  the 
restrictions of space, He may be thought of as being present everywhere through His 
power. And since there is no division or fragmentation in regard to His Essence, He 
can regard and act towards all things with all of His names. And since He is present 
everywhere and acts towards everything, beings and intermediaries and mass cannot 
hinder and prevent His actions, indeed there is no necessity for them to do so. 

Let  us  suppose  there  was  some  necessity,  then  things  like  electric  wires,  the 
branches of trees, and veins in  human beings, would resemble means of facilitation, 
of  the  arrival  of  life,  and  of  swiftness  in  actions.  So,  let  us  ignore  the  idea  of 
hindering,  restricting,  preventing,  and  intervening,  and  say  that  they  are  means  of 
facilitating,  expediting,  and  uniting.  That  is  to  say,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
obedience  and  submission  of  all  things  to  the  domination  of  the  All-Powerful  and 
Glorious One’s power, there is no need for them. If there were some need for them, it 
would be as a means of facilitating. 

 

 

293

294

I n  S h o r t : The All-Powerful Maker creates everything in an appropriate form 
without  trouble,  without  undergoing  any  process,  swiftly  and  easily.  He  creates 
universals  as  easily  as  particulars.  He  creates  particulars  as  full  of  art  as  He  does 
universals.  Indeed,  whoever  creates  universals  and  the  heavens  and  the  earth  must 
necessarily be the one who creates the particulars and animate individuals contained 
in the heavens and earth; it could be nothing other than him. For those tiny particulars 
are the fruits, seeds, and the miniature specimens of universals. 

Furthermore, whoever creates the particulars must also be the one who creates the 
elements  and  heavens  and  earth,  which  encompass  the  particulars.  For  we  see  that 
particulars are each like a seed and tiny copy in relation to universals. Since this is so, 
the universal elements and the heavens and earth must be in the hand of the One who 
creates  those  particulars  so  that,  according  to  the  principles  of  His  wisdom  and  the 
balances of His knowledge, He can insert the gist, the meanings, the samples, of those 
universal  and  all-encompassing  beings  in  those  particulars,  which  are  like  their 
miniature specimens. 

Indeed, from the point of view of the wonders of art and marvels of creativeness, 
particulars  are  not  behind  universals;  neither  are  flowers  lower  than  the  stars,  nor 
seeds inferior to trees. Indeed, the tree’s meaning, which  is the inscription of divine 
determining and is in the seed, is more wonderful than the physical tree, which is the 
weaving  of  divine  power  and  is  in  the  garden.  And  the  creation  of  man  is  more 
wonderful than the creation of the universe. If a Qur’an of Wisdom were to be written 
in particles of ether on an atom, it would far surpass in  value a Qur’an of Grandeur 
written  in  stars  on  the  face  of  the  heavens.  Similarly,  there  are  minute  particulars 
which are superior to universals as regards the miraculousness of their art.  

T h e  F i f t h   

We have demonstrated to an extent  in our explanations above, the  infinite ease, 
utmost  speed,  extreme  swiftnesss  of  actions,  and  boundless  facility  apparent  in  the 
creation  of  beings,  together  with  the  mysteries  and  instances  of  wisdom  in  their 
creation. The existence of things with this utmost speed and utter facility, therefore, 
has given the people of guidance the following firm conviction, that in relation to the 
power of the One who creates beings, Paradises are as easy as the spring, the spring as 
easy as gardens, and gardens as easy as flowers. 

According to the meaning of, 

The creation of you all and the resurrection of you all is but like that of a 
single soul,(31:28) 

 

 

294

295

the resurrection of all humankind is as easy as causing one person to die and raising 
him to life again. And according to the explicit statement of, 

Nothing will there have been but one single blast, and lo! before Us will all 
of them be arraigned,(36:53) 

to raise to life all human beings at the resurrection is as easy as calling together with 
the sound of a bugle an army that has dispersed to rest. 

Although  this  infinite  speed  and  boundless  ease  are  decisive  proofs  and  certain 
arguments  for  the  self-evident  perfection  of  the  Maker’s  power  and  for  everything 
being  easy  for  Him,  in  the  view  of  the  people  of  misguidance,  the  formation  and 
creation of things by that power, which is so easy as to be necessary, gave rise to the 
notion that things form themselves, which is utterly impossible, and thus became the 
cause of confusion. That  is to say, because they see that some ordinary things come 
into existence very easily, they imagine that they  are formed spontaneously. That is, 
they are not created, but come into existence of their own accord. 

There, look at this sheer stupidity! The people of misguidance make what is the 
proof  of  an  absolute  power,  the  proof  of  its  non-existence;  they  open  the  door  to 
innumerable  impossibilities.  For  if  it  were  the  case,  such  attributes  of  perfection  as 
infinite power and all-encompassing knowledge, which are necessary to the Maker of 
the universe, would have to be ascribed to every particle of every creature so that each 
could form itself. 

THE ELEVENTH PHRASE:  “And with Him all things have their end” 

That  is  to  say,  everything  will  return  to  the  realm  of  permanence  from  the 
transient realm, and will go to the seat of the Sempiternal Ever-Enduring One’s post-
eternal sovereignty. They will go from the multiplicity of causes to the domain of the 
All-Glorious  One  of  Unity’s  power,  and  will  be  transferred  from  this  world  to  the 
hereafter. Your place of recourse is His Court, therefore, and your place of refuge, His 
mercy. And so on. 

There are a great many truths which this phrase and those like it state. One is that 
you will return to eternal bliss and Paradise. This has been proved so decisively by the 
irrefutable  certainty  of  the  twelve  arguments  of  the  Tenth  Word,  and  by  the  six 
“Principles”  that  comprise  the  numerous  cogent  proofs  of  the  Twenty-Ninth  Word, 
that they  leave  no need for further explanation. Those two Words have proved with 
the certainty of the sun rising in the following morning after having set the previous 
day,  that  life  too,  which  has  the  meaning  of  the  sun  in  this  world,  will  rise  in  an 
eternal form in the morning of the resurrection after its setting with the destruc 

 

 

295

296

tion of the world. Since the Tenth and Twenty-Ninth Words have proved this truth to 
perfection, we refer you to them and here only say this: 

Further  to  what  has  been  proved  decisively  above,  the  universe’s  All-Wise 
Maker,  who  possesses  boundless  all-embracing  power,  limitless  universal  will,  and 
infinite all-encompassing knowlege – the all-Merciful Creator of human beings – has 
promised in all His heavenly books and decrees Paradise and eternal bliss to those of 
mankind who believe in Him. Since He has promised, He will most certainly bring it 
about,  for  it  is  impossible  for  Him  to  break  His  promise.  Also,  not  to  carry  out  a 
promise  is  an  extremely  ugly  fault,  and  the  One  of  Absolute  Perfection  is  totally 
exempt and free from all fault. Failure to fulfil a promise arises either from ignorance 
or from impotence. However, since it is impossible for ignorance or impotence to be 
ascribed  in  any  way  to  that  Absolutely  Powerful  One,  the  One  Knowing  of  All 
Things, His breaking of a promise is impossible. 

Moreover, first and foremost the Pride of the Worlds (Upon whom be blessings 
and  peace),  and  all  the  prophets,  saints,  purified  scholars,  and  people  of  belief, 
continuously  request  and  implore,  desire  and  beseech  the  All-Generous  and 
Compassionate  One  for  the  eternal  bliss  they  have  been  promised.  They  beseech  it 
through all His Most Beautiful Names. For foremost His compassion and mercy, and 
justice and wisdom, His names of All-Merciful and Compassionate, and All-Just and 
Wise, and His dominicality  and sovereignty, and  most of  His  names  including  Lord 
and Sustainer (Rabb) and Allah, require and necessitate the realm of the hereafter and 
eternal happiness, and they testify and point to its realization. Indeed, all beings with 
all of their truths point to the hereafter. 

The All-Wise Qur’an, the  greatest of the revealed books, also demonstrates and 
teaches  this  truth with  thousands  of  its  verses;  with  clear  evidences  and  conclusive, 
veracious proofs. 

The Most Noble Beloved One, too, who is the cause of pride for the human 
race, relying on thousands of dazzling miracles taught this truth throughout 
his  life,  with  all  his  strength;  he  proved  it,  proclaimed  it,  saw  it,  and 
demonstrated it. 
O God, grant blessings and peace and benedictions to him and to his Family 
and Companions to the number of the breaths of the people of Paradise; and 
resurrect us and resurrect him and his friends and Companions to bliss, and 
our  parents  and  brothers  and  sisters  under  his  banner,  and  grant  us  his 
intercession,  and  allow  us  to  enter  Paradise  with  his  Family  and 
Companions, through Your mercy, O Most Merciful of the Merciful. Amen. 
Amen. 

 

 

296

 

 

297

O  our  Sustainer!  Do  not  take  us  to  task  if  we  forget  or  unwittingly  do 
wrong.(2:286) 
O  our  Sustainer!  Let  not  our  hearts  swerve  from  the  truth  after  You  have 
guided us; and bestow upon us the gift of Your mercy; indeed, You are the 
Giver of Gifts.(3:8) 
O my Sustainer! Open up my heart  * And make my task easy for me * And 
loosen  the  knot  from  my  tongue  *  That  they  might  fully  understand  my 
speech.(20:25-8) 
O  our  Sustainer!  Accept  this  from  us,  indeed  You  are  All-Seeing,  All-
Knowing. *  And forgive us, indeed You are the Accepter of Repentance, the 
Compassionate.(2:127-8) 
All  glory  be  unto  You!  We  have  no  knowledge  save  that  which  You  have 
taught us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

297

298

Addendum to the Tenth Phrase 
of the Twentieth Letter 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise. 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
For  verily,  in  the  remembrance  of  God  hearts  do  find  their  rest.(13:28)  * 
God sets forth a parable: A man belonging to many partners [all of them] at 
variance with one another.(39:29) 

Q  u  e  s  t  i  o  n  :  You  have  said  in  many  places  that  in  divine  unity  there  is  an 
infinite  facility  and  in  multiplicity  and  associating  partners  with  God,  endless 
difficulties;  that  there  is  such  ease  in  divine  unity  that  it  is  necessary  and  such 
difficulty  in  associating  partners  with  God  that  it  is  impossible.  Whereas,  the 
difficulties and  impossibilities  that  you  demonstrate  are  also  present  with  unity.  For 
example,  you say that if particles were not officials, it would be necessary for either 
all-encompassing knowledge or absolute power or innumerable immaterial machines 
and  printing-presses  to  be  present  in  every  particle.  This  of  course  is  completely 
impossible. Even if those particles were divine officials, it would still be necessary for 
them to bear the same qualities so that they would be able to accomplish their endless 
orderly duties. Could you unravel this problem for me? 

T h e  A n s w e r : We have expounded and proved in many Words that if all 
beings are attributed to a single Maker, they become as easy and effortless as a single 
being. If they are attributed to numerous causes and to nature, a single fly becomes as 
difficult and arduous as the heavens, a flower as the spring, a fruit as a garden. Since 
this  mattter  has  been  proved  in  other  Words,  we  refer  you  to  them  and  here  only 
explain three comparisons, by means of three indications, which will reassure the soul 
and set the mind at rest in the face of that truth. 

First Comparison: For example, a tiny transparent glistening speck cannot of its 
own accord situate itself within a light the size of a match-head even, and neither can 
it  be  the  source  of  it.  It  is  able  to  have  as  much  light,  in  its  own  right,  as  a  tiny 
particle, in accordance with its capacity and to the extent of its own mass. But if the 
speck is connected to the sun, if it  

 

 

298

299

opens its eyes and looks at it, it will be able to comprehend the immense sun together 
with its light, seven colours, heat, and even its distance; it will display a sort of greater 
manifestation.  That  is  to  say,  if  the  particle  remains  on  its  own,  it  will  be  able  to 
perform  a  function  only  to  the  extent  of  a particle,  whereas  if  it  is  deemed  to be  an 
official  of  the  sun,  and  is  connected  to  it  and  is  a  mirror  to  it,  it  will  be  able  to 
demonstrate  certain  partial  examples  of  the  sun’s  functioning,  the  same  as  the  sun 
itself.  

Thus, “And God’s is the highest similitude,”(16:60) if all beings, all particles, are 
attributed  to  multiplicity,  causes,  nature,  themselves,  or  to  anything  other  than  God, 
then each of them must either possess all-embracing knowledge and absolute power, 
or innumerable immaterial machines and printing-presses must take form within each, 
so that it can carry out its wonderful duties. However, if the particles are attributed to 
the Single One of Unity, each of them, each artefact, becomes connected to Him; it is 
as  though  each  becomes  His  official.  Its  connection  allows  it  to  display  His 
manifestation. And through this connection and state of being a manifestation, it relies 
on an infinite knowledge and power. Thus, by reason of the mystery of the connection 
and its reliance,  it performs functions and duties  far beyond its own power, through 
the power of its Creator. 

Second Comparison: For example, there were two brothers, one brave and self-
reliant, the other patriotic and devoted to his country. When a war broke out, the one 
who  relied  on  himself  did  not  form  any  connection  with  the  state;  he  wanted  to 
perform his service on his own. He was compelled therefore to carry his own sources 
of  power,  and  to  transport,  as  far  as  his  strength  allowed,  his  equipment  and 
ammunition.  In  accordance  with  his  petty  individual  strength,  he  was  only  able  to 
fight with one corporal of the enemy army; to do more was beyond him.  

The  other  brother  did  not  rely  on  himself;  he  knew  himself  to  be  weak  and 
powerless  so  established  a  connection  with  the  king  and  was  enrolled  in  the  army. 
Through  this  connection,  the  huge  army  became  a  source  of  support  for  him.  And 
because of this support, he was plunged into war with the moral strength of an army 
behind him under the auspices of the king. So when he encountered an eminent field 
marshal of the defeated enemy army’s king, he declared in the name of his own king: 
“I  take  you  prisoner!  Quick  march!”  He  captured  him  and  handed  him  over.  The 
meaning of this situation and the wisdom in it is this: 

Since  the  first,  independent,  man,  was  compelled  to  carry  his  equipment  and 
sources  of  strength  himself,  the  service  he  was  able  to  perform  was  extremely 
insignificant. Whereas the one who was an official did not have to carry his source of 
strength; indeed, the army and the king carried him.  

 

 

299

300

Just like connecting his receiver to existing telegraph and telephone lines with a tiny 
wire,  the  man,  through  the  connection  he  formed,  connected  himself  to  an  infinite 
power. 

Thus, “And God’s is the highest similitude,”(16:60) if all creatures, all particles, 
are  attributed directly  to  the  Single  One  of  Unity  and  if they  are  connected  to  Him, 
through the power of the connection and through of its Lord, at His command, an ant 
can demolish the Pharaoh’s palace; a fly can kill off Nimrod and consign him to Hell; 
a germ can despatch an iniquitous tyrant to the grave; a seed the size of a wheat grain 
becomes  the  workshop  and  machinery  for  producing  a  pine-tree  the  size  of  a 
mountain; and a particle of air is able to operate efficiently and systematically in the 
different  functions  and structures of  all  flowers  and fruits.  All this  ease  and  facility 
self-evidently arise from the connection and state of being an official. If the being in 
question reverts to independence, if it is left to causes, multiplicity, and to itself, if it 
travels  the  road of  associating  partners  with  God,  then  the  service  it  will  be  able  to 
perform  will  be  only  to  the  extent  of  its  physical  entity  and  to  the  degree  of  its 
consciousness. 

Third Comparison: For example, there were two friends who wanted to write a 
geographical  and  statistical  work  on  a  country  they  had  never  seen.  One  of  them 
formed  a  connection  with  the  king  and  entered  the  telegraph  and  telephone  office. 
With a piece of wire worth a few kurush, he connected his own telephone receiver to 
the state lines and was able to communicate with everywhere and receive information. 
He wrote a perfectly  composed and well-arranged work of  geography and statistics. 
As for the other man, either he would have had to travel continuously for fifty  years 
and see everywhere and learn of every event with  great difficulty, or else, spending 
millions of liras he would have had to become the owner, like the king, of a telegraph 
and telephone system as extensive as that of the state so that he could write a perfect 
work like his friend. 

Similarly,  “And  God’s  is  the  highest  similitude,”(16:60)  if  innumerable  things 
and creatures are attributed to the Single One of Unity, through the connection, each 
becomes  a  place  of  manifestation.  Through  displaying  the  manifestation  of  the  Pre-
Eternal Sun, it acquires a connection with the  laws of His wisdom, the principles of 
his  knowledge,  and  the  decrees  of  His  power.  Then,  through  divine  strength  and 
power, it displays such a dominical manifestation that it acquires an eye that sees all 
things, a face that looks to all places, and words that have weight in all matters. If the 
connection  is  severed,  the  thing  will  also  be  cut off from everything  else,  it will  be 
squeezed into the smallness of its own bulk. In which case, it would have to possess 
absolute divinity so that it could perform the functions described above. 

 

 

300

301

I  n    S h o  r  t  : The  easiness  and  facility  on  the  way  of  divine  unity  and  belief 
make it necessary, while the difficulties on the way of causes and assigning partners 
to  God  make  it  impossible.  For  one  person  may,  without  trouble,  put  numerous 
objects  into  a  single  situation  and  obtain  one  result.  But  if  it  is  left  to  the  objects 
themselves  to  bring  about the  situation  and  obtain  the  result,  they  could do  so only 
with great trouble and much activity. 

For example, as is stated in the Third Letter, every night, every year, a glittering 
expedition and passage glorifying God is accomplished through setting in motion the 
army  of  the  stars  in  the  field  of  the  heavens  under  the  command of  the  sun  and the 
moon. This is the alluring and captivating situation of the heavens. The alternation of 
the seasons and other momentous affairs are brought about; and this is the exalted and 
purposeful result of the motion of the earth. If the situation of the heavens and result 
of  the  revolving  earth  are  ascribed  to  divine  unity,  the  Pre-Eternal  Monarch  may 
easily  appoint  a  soldier  like  the  globe  of  the  earth  as  commander  of  the  heavenly 
bodies for the situation and the result to be achieved. After it has received its order, 
the earth will rise up with joy at its appointment  to whirl and mention God’s names 
like  a  Mevlevi  dervish.  With  slight  expense  that  graceful  situation  will  be  obtained 
and the significant result come about. 

However, if  it  is said to the  earth: “You stop where  you are, do not interfere!”; 
and if to obtain the result and situation, it is referred to the heavens; and if the road of 
multiplicity and associating partners with God is taken rather than that of divine unity, 
it will be necessary, every day and every year, to set in motion millions of stars which 
are  thousands  of  times  larger than  the  globe of  the  earth  and  to  cover  a  distance  of 
millions of years in twenty-four hours and a year. 

C o n c l u s i o n : The Qur’an and the believers ascribe limitless creatures to 
One Maker. They attribute every matter directly to Him. They travel a road so easy as 
to be  necessary,  and  urge  all  towards  it.  While the  people  of  rebellion,  who  ascribe 
partners to God, by attributing a single creature to innumerable causes, travel a road 
so beset with dificulties as to be impossible. In which case, those on the way of the 
Qur’an are together with all creatures, and those on the  way of misguidance, with  a 
single  creature.  Or  to  put  it  another  way,  the  issuing  of  all  things  out  of  one  is 
infinitely  easier than  the  issuing  of  one  thing  out  of  many.  In  the  same  way  that  an 
officer commands a thousand soldiers as easily as one soldier, if the command of one 
soldier  were  to  be  assigned  to  a  thousand  officers,  it  would  become  as  difficult  as 
commanding a thousand soldiers, it would cause chaos. 

 

 

301

302

Thus,  this  mighty  verse  hurls  this  truth  at  those  who  assign  partners  to  God, 

shattering their unbelief: 

God sets forth a parable: A man belonging to many partners [all of them] at 
variance with one another, and a man belonging wholly to one person: can 
the two be deemed equal as regards their condition? [Nay] all praise is due 
to God [alone]; but most of them do not understand this.(39:29) 
All  glory  be  unto  You!  We  have  no  knowledge  save  that  which  You  have 
taught us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 
O God! Grant blessings and peace to our master Muhammad to the number 
of  the  particles  of  the  universe,  and  to  all  his  Family  and  Companions. 
Amen. And all praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds. 
O  God!  O  Unique  One!  O  Single  One!  O  Eternally  Besought  One!  Other 
than You there is no god, You are One, You have no partner!  Yours is the 
dominion and the praise! Granter of life and Dealer of death! All good is in 
Your  hand!  O  One  powerful  over  all  things!  It  is  with  You  that all  things 
have their end! Through the truth of the mysteries of these phrases, appoint 
the  propagator  of  this  treatise  and  his  friends  and  companions  to  bliss 
among  the  perfected  affirmers  of  divine  unity  and  the  strictly  veracious 
scholars  and  the  believers  conscious  of  God.  Amen.  O  God!  Through  the 
truth  of  the  mystery  of  Your  oneness  make  the  disseminator  of  this  book 
disseminate the mysteries of the profession of Your unity and make his heart 
a place of  manifestation for  the  lights of  faith and his  tongue  speak of  the 
truths of the Qur’an. Amen. Amen. Amen. 

 

 

302

303

The Twenty-First Letter 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Whether one or both of them attain old age in your life, say not to them a 
word  of  contempt, nor repel  them, but address  them  in  terms  of honour. * 
And  out  of  kindness,  lower  the  wing  of  humility,  and  say:  “My  Sustainer! 
Bestow  on  them  Your  mercy  even  as  they  cherished  me  in  childhood.”  * 
Your  Sustainer  knows  best  what  is  in  your  hearts:  if  you  do  deeds  of 
righteousness, indeed he is Most Forgiving to those who turn to Him again 
and again [in true penitence].(17:23-5) 

O  heedless  person  who  has  in  his  house  an  elderly  parent  or  an  invalid  or 
someone  no  longer  able  to  work  from  among  his  relations  or  brothers  in  religion! 
Study  the  above  verses  carefully  and  see  how  on  five  levels  in  different  ways  it 
summons children to be kindly towards their elderly parents. Yes, the highest truth in 
this world is the compassion of parents towards their children, and the most elevated 
rights,  their  rights  of  respect  in  return  for  their  compassion.  For  they  sacrifice  their 
lives with the utmost pleasure, spending them for the sake of their children’s lives. In 
which case, every child who has not lost his humanity and become a monster honours 
those  respected,  loyal,  self-sacrificing  friends,  serves  them  sincerely,  and  tries  to 
please them and make them happy. Uncles and aunts, maternal and paternal, are like 
parents.1 

So  understand  from  this  how  base  and  lacking  in  conscience  it  is  to  be 

contemptuous of those blessed elderly people, or to want their deaths.  

                                                 
1 Bukhari, Sulh, 6; Tirmidhi, Birr, 6; Abu Da’ud, Talaq, 35; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, ix, 269; 
al-Daylami, Musnad al-Firdaws, ii, 207. 

303

 

 

304

Know what a wicked wrong and iniquity it is to want the lives of those who sacrificed 
their lives for yours to pass quickly. 

O  you  who  struggles  to  secure  his  livelihood!  That  elderly  or  blind  relative  of 
yours  whom  you  belittle  is  a  source  of  plenty  and  mercy  in  your  house  and  repels 
disaster.  Beware!  Do  not  say:  “I  have  a  low  income  and  difficulty  in  making  ends 
meet,”  for  if  it  were  not  for  the  plenty  resulting  from  their  presence,  your 
circumstances  would  have  been  even  more  straitened.  Believe  this  fact  which  I  am 
telling you; I could prove it decisively and convince you, but I am cutting it short so 
as  not  to  prolong  the  discussion.  Be  content  with  this  much.  I  swear  that  it  is 
absolutely certain; my evil-commanding soul and own devil, even, have submitted to 
it.  So  you  should be persuaded by  something  that  has  smashed  my  soul’s  obduracy 
and silenced my devil. 

Yes,  the  All-Glorious  and  Munificent  Creator,  who,  as  the  universe  testifies,  is 
infinitely  Merciful,  Compassionate,  Bountiful,  and  Generous,  provides  infants  with 
the  finest of sustenance when  He  sends them  into this world, causing it to flow into 
their  mouths  from  the  springs  of  their mother’s  breasts.  So  too,  He  provides,  in  the 
form of plenty, the sustenance of the elderly, who are like children though even more 
in need and deserving of kindness and compassion. He does not burden the avaricious 
and  miserly  with  their  livelihood.  All  living  creatures  and  all  their  species  declare 
through  the  tongues  of  their  beings  the  munificent  truth  expressed  by  the  following 
verses: 

For God is He Who gives [all] sustenance, – Lord of Power and Steadfast 
[for  ever].(51:58)  *  How  many  are  the  creatures  that  carry  not  their  own 
sustenance? It is God Who feeds [both] them and you.(29:60) 

In  fact,  it  is  not  only  the  sustenance  of  elderly  relations  that  comes  in  the  form  of 
plenty; the sustenance of creatures like cats who are friendly to man also comes in the 
form  of  plenty,  sent  together  with  the  food  of  the  human  beings.  An  example 
supporting  this, which  I  myself  observed,  is  as follows:  my  close friends  know  that 
for two to three years my appointed lot every day was half a loaf of bread, the loaves 
in that village were small, and very often this was insufficient for me. Then four cats 
came and stayed with me as my guests, and that same portion was sufficient both for 
myself and for them. There was frequently some left over even. 

This has recurred so often that it has made me certain that I was benefiting from 
the plenty resulting from the cats. I declare most definitely that they were not a load 
on me. It was not they who were obliged to me, but I to them. 

O man! If a semi-wild animal is a means of plenty when it comes as a  

 

 

304

305

guest to the house of a human being,  you can compare for  yourself what plenty and 
mercy man will bring as the noblest of creatures; and the believers, the most perfect 
of  men;  and  the  powerless  and  ailing  elderly,  the  most  worthy  of  respect  and 
compassion  among  the  believers;  and  relatives,  the  most  worthy  and  deserving  of 
kindness,  love,  and  to be served  among  the  ailing  elderly; and  parents, who  are the 
truest and most loyal  friends among relatives,  if they  are present in a  house in their 
old age. According to the meaning of, “If it were not for the elderly, bent double with 
age, calamities would be visited on  you in  floods,”2  you can see the significant role 
they play in disasters being averted. 

O man, come to your senses! You too will grow old if  you do not die young. If 
you do not honour your parents, as stated by, “the punishment is similar to the act that 
required it,”3 your children will not be dutiful towards you. If you want to secure your 
life  in  the  hereafter,  here  is  a  rich  treasury  for  you:  be dutiful  towards  your parents 
and win their pleasure! While if it is this world that you want, still try to please them, 
for thanks to them your life will be easy and your sustenance plentiful. But if you are 
contemptuous of them, wish for their deaths, and wound their sensitive and vulnerable 
hearts, you will manifest the meaning of the verse, 

They lose both this world and the hereafter.(22:11) 

If  you want the mercy of the Most Merciful One, be merciful towards those in  your 
house whom He has entrusted to you. 

There was someone called Mustafa Çavuş, one of my brothers of the hereafter. I 
used to observe that he was very successful both in his religious life and his worldly 
life. I did not know the reason for this. Then later I understood that the reason for his 
achievement was that he had understood the rights of his elderly parents and observed 
them  to  the  letter;  thanks  to  them  he  had  found  ease  and  mercy.  God  willing,  he 
repaired his life in the hereafter as well. Anyone who wants good fortune should try to 
resemble him. 

O God, grant blessings and peace to the one who said: “Paradise is beneath 
the feet of mothers,”4 and to all his Family and Companions. 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

                                                 
2 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 163; Suyuti, Kanz al-‘Ummal, ix, 167; Ghazali, Ihya’ ‘Ulum al-Din, 
341; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, x, 227; Bayhaqi, al-Sunan al-Kubra, 345. 
3 “All acts are requited with something similar to them.” al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 332; ‘Ali al-
Qari, al-Asrar al-Marfu’a, 103. 
4 Suyuti, al-Jami’ al-Saghir, 3642; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 335; al-Albani, Sahih al-Jami’ al-
Saghir wa ziyadatuhu, 1259, 1260. 

305

 

 

306

The Twenty-Second Letter 

In His Name! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

 [This  letter  consists  of  two  topics;  the  first  summons  believers  to 
brotherhood and love.] 

First Topic 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Verily the believers are brethren; so reconcile then your brothers.(49:10) * 
Repel  evil  with  what  is  better  than  it;  then  the  one  between  whom  and 
yourself enmity prevails will become like your friend and intimate.(41:34) * 
Those who suppress their anger and forgive people – verily God loves those 
who do good.(3:134) 

Dispute  and discord among  the  believers,  and partisanship, obstinacy  and  envy, 
leading to rancour and enmity among them, are repugnant and vile, are harmful and 
sinful, by the combined testimony of wisdom and the supreme humanity that is Islam, 
for personal, social, and spiritual life. They are in short, poison for the life of man. We 
will set forth six of the extremely numerous aspects of this truth. 

First Aspect 

They are sinful in the view of truth. 
O  unjust  man  nurturing  rancour  and  enmity  against  a  believer!  Let  us 

NOTE: The present translation of the Twenty-Second Letter was carried out by Hamid 
Algar, Prof. of Near Eastern Studies in Univ. of California, Berkeley, U.S.A., and first 
published in 1976. It has been slightly amended to fit the present work. 
 

 

 

 

306

307

suppose  that  you  were  on  a  ship,  or  in  a  house,  with  nine  innocent  people  and  one 
criminal.  If  someone  were  to try  to  make  the  ship  sink,  or  to  set  the  house  on  fire, 
because of that criminal,  you know how great a sinner  he would be. You would cry 
out  to  the  heavens  against  his  sinfulness.  Even  if  there  were  one  innocent man  and 
nine criminals aboard the ship, it would be against all rules of justice to sink it. 

So  too,  if  there  are  in  the  person  of  a  believer,  who  may  be  compared  to  a 
dominical dwelling, a divine ship, not nine, but as many as twenty innocent attributes 
such as belief, Islam, and neighbourliness; and if you then nurture rancour and enmity 
against  him  on  account  of  one  criminal  attribute  that  harms  and  displeases  you, 
attempting or desiring the sinking of his being, the burning of his house, then you too 
will be a criminal guilty of a great atrocity. 

Second Aspect 

They are also sinful in the view of wisdom, for it is obvious that enmity and love 
are opposites, just like light and darkness; while maintaining their respective essences, 
they cannot be combined. 

If love is truly found in a heart, by virtue of the predomination of the causes that 
produce it, then enmity in that heart can only be metaphorical, and takes on the form 
of compassion. The believer loves and should love his brother, and is pained by any 
evil he sees in him. He attempts to reform him not with harshness but gently. It is for 
this  reason  that  the  Hadith  of  the  Prophet  (UWBP)  says,  “No  believer  should  be 
angered with another and cease speaking to him for more than three days.”1  

If the causes that produce enmity predominate, and true enmity takes up its seat 
in a heart, then the love in that heart will become metaphorical, and take on the form 
of artifice and flattery. 

O unjust man! See now what a great sin is rancour and enmity toward a brother 
believer!  If  you  were  to  say  that  ordinary  small  stones  are  more  valuable  than  the 
Ka‘ba  and  greater  than  Mount  Uhud,  it  would  be  an  ugly  absurdity.  So  too,  belief 
which has the value of the Ka‘ba, and Islam which has the splendour of Mount Uhud, 
as  well  as  other  Islamic  attributes,  demand  love  and  concord;  but  if  you  prefer  to 
belief and Islam certain shortcomings which arouse hostility, but in reality are like the 
small stones you too will be engaging in great injustice, foolishness, and sin! 

                                                 
1 Bukhari, Adab, 57, 62; Isti’dhan, 9; Muslim, Birr, 23, 25, 26; Abu Da’ud, Adab, 47; Tirmidhi, Birr, 
21, 24; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 7; Musnad, i, 176, 183; iii, 110, 165, 199, 209, 225; iv, 20, 327, 328; v, 
416, 421, 422. 

307

 

 

308

The  unity  of  belief  necessitates  also  the  unity  of  hearts,  and  the  oneness of  our 
creed demands the oneness of our society. You cannot deny that if  you find yourself 
in  the  same  regiment  as  someone,  you  will  form  a  friendly  attachment  to  him;  a 
brotherly relation will come into being as a result of your both being submitted to the 
orders  of  a  single  commander.  You  will  similarly  experience  a  fraternal  relation 
through living in the same town with someone. Now there are ties of unity, bonds of 
union, and relations of fraternity as numeous as the divine names that are shown and 
demonstrated to you by the light and consciousness of belief. 

Your Creator, Owner, Object of Worship, and Provider is one and the same  for 
both  of  you;  thousands  of  things  are  and  the  same  for  you.  Your  Prophet  (UWBP), 
your  religion,  your  qibla  are  one  and  the  same;  hundreds  of  things  are  one  and  the 
same for you. Then too your village is one, your state is one, your country is one; tens 
of  things  are  one and  the  same  for  you.  All  of  these things  held  in  common dictate 
oneness and unity, union and concord, love and brotherhood, and indeed the cosmos 
and  the  planets  are  similarly  interlinked  by  unseen  chains.  If,  despite  all  this,  you 
prefer  things  worthless  and  transient  as  a  spider’s  web  that  give  rise  to  dispute  and 
discord,  to  rancour  and  enmity,  and  engage  in  true  enmity  towards  a believer,  then 
you will understand – unless  your heart is dead and your intelligence extinguished – 
how great is your disrespect for that bond of unity, your slight to that relation of love, 
your transgression against that tie of brotherhood! 

Third Aspect 

In accordance with the meaning of the verse: 

No bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another,(6:164) 

which expresses pure justice, to nurture rancour and enmity towards a believer is like 
condemning  all  the  innocent  attributes  found  in  him  on  account  of  one  criminal 
attribute, and is hence an act of great injustice. If you go further and include in  your 
enmity all the relatives of a believer on account of a single evil attribute of his, then, 
in  accordance  with  the  following  verse  in  which  the  active  participle  is  in  the 
intensive form, 

Verily man is much given to wrongdoing,(14:34) 

you will have committed a still greater sin and transgression, against which truth, the 
Shari‘a  and  the  wisdom of Islam  combine  to  warn  you. How  then  can  you imagine 
yourself to be right, and say: “I am in the right”? 

In the view of truth, the cause for enmity and all forms of evil is in itself evil and 

is dense like clay: it cannot infect or pass on to others. If someone  

 

 

308

309

learns from it and commits evil, that  is another question. Good qualities that arouse 
love are luminous like love; it is part of their function to be transmitted and produce 
effects.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  proverb  has  come  into  being,  “The  friend  of  a 
friend is a friend,”2 and also that it is said, “Many eyes are beloved on account of one 
eye.” 

So O unjust man! If such be the  view of truth,  you will understand now, if  you 
have the capacity for seeing the truth, how great an offence it is to cherish enmity for 
the likeable and innocent brothers and relatives of a man you dislike. 

Fourth Aspect 

It  is  a  sin  from  the  point  of  view  of  personal  life.  Listen  to  the  following  four 

principles which are the base of this Fourth Aspect. 

First Principle: When you know your way and opinions to be true, you have the 
right  to  say,  “My  way  is  right  and  the  best.”  But  you do  not  have  the  right  to  say, 
“Only my way is right.” According to the sense of “The eye of contentment is too dim 
to perceive faults; It is the eye of anger that exhibits all vice;”3 your unjust view and 
distorted opinion  cannot be  the  all-decisive  judge and  cannot  condemn  the  belief  of 
another as invalid. 

Second Principle: It is your right that all that you say should be true, but not that 
you  should  say  all  that  is  true.  For  one  of  insincere  intention  may  sometimes  take 
unkindly to advice, and react against it unfavourably. 

Third Principle: If you wish to nourish enmity, then direct it against the enmity 
in your heart, and attempt to rid yourself of it. Be an enemy to your evil-commanding 
soul and its caprice and attempt to reform it, for it inflicts more harm on you than all 
else.  Do  not  engage  in  enmity  against  other  believers  on  account  of  that  injurious 
soul. Again, if you wish to cherish enmity, there are unbelievers and atheists in great 
abundance;  be  hostile  to  them.  In  the  same  way  that  the  attribute  of  love  is  fit  to 
receive  love  as  its  response,  so  too  enmity  will  receive  enmity  as  its  own  fitting 
response. If you wish to defeat your enemy, then respond to his evil with good. For if 
you  respond  with  evil,  enmity  will  increase,  and  even  though  he  will  be  outwardly 
defeated,  he  will  nurture  hatred  in  his  heart  and  hostility  will  persist.  But  if  you 
respond to him with good, he will repent and become your friend. The meaning of the 
lines: “If you treat the noble nobly, he will be yours; And if you treat the vile nobly, 
he will revolt,”4 is that it is the  

                                                 
2 ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, Nahj al-Balagha, 748-9. 
3 ‘Ali Mawardi, Adab al-Dunya wa’l-Din, 10; Diwan al-Shafi’i, 91. 
4 Mutanabi. See, al-‘Urf al-Tayyib fi Sharh Diwan al-Tayyib, ii, 710. 

309

 

 

310

mark  of  the  believer  to  be  noble,  and  he  will  become  submitted  to  you  by  noble 
treatment. And even if someone is apparently ignoble, he is noble with respect to his 
belief. It often happens that if you tell an evil man, “You are good, you are good,” he 
will  become  good; and  if  you  tell  a good  man, “You  are bad,  you are bad,”  he will 
become  bad.  Hearken,  therefore,  to  these  sacred  principles  of  the  Qur’an,  for 
happiness and safety are to be found in them: 

If they pass by futility, they pass by it in honourable disdain.(25:72) * If you 
forgive, pardon, and relent, verily God is All-Relenting, Merciful.(64:14) 

Fourth Principle: Those who cherish rancour and enmity transgress against their 
own souls, their brother believer, and divine mercy. For such a person condemns his 
soul to painful torment with his rancour and enmity. He imposes torment on his soul 
whenever his enemy receives some bounty, and pain from fear of him. If his enmity 
arises from envy, then it is the most severe form of torment. For envy in the first place 
consumes and destroys the envier, and its harm for the one envied is either slight or 
nonexistent. 

The  cure for envy:  Let  the  envious  reflect on  the  ultimate  fate  of  those  things 
that  arouse  his enmity.  Then  he  will  understand  that  the  beauty,  strength,  rank,  and 
wealth possessed by his rival are transient and temporary. Their benefit is slight, and 
the anxiety they  cause is  great. If  it is a question of personal qualities that will  gain 
him reward in the hereafter, they  cannot be an object of envy.  But if one does envy 
another on account of them, then he is either himself a hypocrite, wishing to destroy 
the  goods of  the  hereafter  while  yet  in  this  world, or  he  imagines  the  one  whom  he 
envies to be a hypocrite, thus being unjust towards him. 

If  he  rejoices  at  the  misfortunes  he  suffers  and  is  grieved  by  the  bounties  he 
receives,  it  is  as  if  he  is  offended  by  the  kindness  shown  towards  him  by  divine 
determining (kader) and divine mercy, as if he were criticizing and objecting to them. 
Whoever criticizes divine determining is striking his head against an anvil on which it 
will break, and whoever objects to divine mercy will himself be deprived of it. 

How  might  justice  and  sound  conscience accept  that  the  response  to  something 
worth not even a day’s hostility should be a year’s rancour and hostility? You cannot 
condemn a brother believer for some evil you experience at his hand for the following 
reasons: 

Firstly, divine determining has a certain share of responsibility. It is necessary to 

deduct that share from the total and respond to it with contentment and satisfaction. 

 

 

310

311

Secondly, the share of the soul and Satan should also be deducted, and one should 
pity the man for having been overcome by his soul and await his repentance instead of 
becoming his enemy. 

Thirdly, look at the defect in your own soul that you do not see or do not wish to 
see;  deduct  a  share  for  that  too.  As  for  the  small  share  which  then  remains,  if  you 
respond with forgiveness, pardon, and magnanimity, in such a way as to conquer your 
enemy  swiftly  and  safely,  then  you  will  have  escaped  all  sin  and harm. But  if,  like 
some drunken  and  crazed person  who buys  up  fragments  of  glass  and  ice as  if  they 
were  diamonds,  you  respond  to  worthless,  transient,  temporary,  and  insignificant 
happenings  of  this  world  with  violent  enmity,  permanent  rancour,  and  perpetual 
hostility, as if you were going to remain in the world with your enemy for all eternity, 
it would be extreme transgression, sinfulness, drunkenness, and lunacy. 

If  then  you  love  yourself,  do  not  permit  this  harmful  hostility  and  desire  for 
revenge, so harmful for personal life, to enter your heart. If it has entered your heart, 
do not listen to what it says. Hear what truth-seeing Hafiz of Shiraz says: “The world 
is  not  a  commodity  worth  arguing  over.”  It  is  worthless  since  it  is  transient  and 
passing. If this is true of the world, then it is clear how worthless and insignficant are 
the petty affairs of the world! Hafiz also said: “The tranquillity of both worlds lies in 
the  understanding  of  these  two  words:  generosity  towards  friends,  forbearance 
towards enemies.”5 

I  f    y  o  u    s a  y  :    “I  have  no  choice,  there  is  enmity  within  my  disposition.  I 

cannot overlook those who antagonize me.” 

T h e  A n s w e r :  If evil character and bad disposition do not exhibit any trace, 
and  you do not act with  ill  intention, there  is  no harm. If  you have  no choice  in the 
matter, then you are unable to abandon your enmity. If you recognize your defect and 
understand that  you are wrong to have that attribute, it will be a form of repentance 
and seeking of forgiveness for you, thus delivering  you from its evil effects. In fact, 
we have written this Topic of the Letter in order to make possible such a seeking of 
forgiveness,  to  distinguish  right  from  wrong,  and  to  prevent  enmity  from  being 
displayed as rightful. 

A case worthy of notice: I once saw, as a result of biased partisanship, a pious 
scholar  of  religion  going  so  far  in  his  condemnation  of  another  scholar  with  whose 
political opinions he disagreed as to imply that he was an unbeliever. He also praised 
with respect a dissembler who shared his  

                                                 
5 Diwan-i Hafiz, 14 (Ghazal no: 5). 

311

 

 

312

own opinions. I was appalled at these evil results of political involvement. I said: “I 
take refuge with God from Satan and politics,” and from that time on withdrew from 
politics. 

Fifth Aspect 

Obstinacy and partisanship are extremely harmful in social life. 
I f  i t  i s  s a i d : There is a Hadith which says: “Difference among my people is 

an instance of divine mercy,”6 and difference requires partisanship.  

The sickness of partisanship also delivers the oppressed common people from the 
oppressor elite, for if the elite of a town or village join together, they will destroy the 
oppressed  common  people.  If  there  is  partisanship,  the  oppressed  may  seek  refuge 
with one of the parties and thus save himself.  

It  is  also from the confrontation of opinions and the contradiction of  views that 

truth becomes apparent in its full measure. 

T h e  A n s w e r :  
To the first part of the question, we say: The difference intended in the Hadith 
is  a  positive  difference.  That  is,  each  party  strives  to  promote  and  diffuse  its  own 
belief;  it  does  not  seek  to  tear  down  and  destroy  that  of  the  other,  but  rather  to 
improve  and  reform  it.  Negative  difference  is  rejected  by  the  Hadith,  for  it  aims  in 
partisan and hostile fashion at mutual destruction, and those who are at each other’s 
throats cannot act positively. 

To  the second  part of  the  question,  we  say:  If  partisanship  is  in  the  name  of 
truth, it can become a refuge for those seeking their rights. But as for the partisanship 
obtaining  now,  biased  and  self-centred,  it  can  only  be  a  refuge  for  the  unjust  and  a 
point  of  support  for  them.  For  if  a  devil  comes  to  a  man  engaged  in  biased 
partisanship, encourages him in his ideas and takes his side, that man will call down 
God’s blessings on the Devil. But if the opposing side is joined by a man of angelic 
nature, then he will – may God protect us! – go so far as to invoke curses upon him. 

To  the third part of  the question,  we  say:  If  the  confrontation  of  views  takes 
place  in  the  name  of  justice  and  for  the  sake  of  truth,  then  the  difference  concerns 
only  means;  there  is unity  with  respect  to  aim  and basic  purpose. Such  a  difference 
makes  manifest  every  aspect  of  the  truth  and  serves  justice  and  truth.  But  what 
emerges from a confrontation of views that is partisan and biased, and takes place for 
the  sake of  a tyrannical,  evil-commanding  soul,  that  is  based  on  egotism  and  fame-
seeking – what emerges from this is not the flash of truth, but the fire of dissension.  

                                                 
6 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 64; al-Manawi, Fayd al-Qadir, i, 210-12. 

312

 

 

313

Unity of aim is  necessary, but opposing views of this kind can  never find a point of 
convergence anywhere on earth. Since they do not differ for the sake of the truth, they 
multiply ad infinitum, and give rise to divergences that can never be reconciled. 

I n  S h o r t :  If one does not make of the exalted rules, “Love for the sake of 
God,7  *  Dislike  for  the  sake  of  God,  judgement  for  the  sake  of  God”8  the  guiding 
principles  of  one’s  conduct,  dispute  and  discord  will  result.  If  one  does  not  say, 
“dislike for the sake of God, judgement for the sake of God” and take due account of 
those principles, one’s attempts to do justice will result in injustice. 

An event with an important lesson: Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) 
once  threw  an  unbeliever  to  the  ground.  As  he  drew  his  sword  to  kill  him,  the 
unbeliever spat in his face. He released him without killing him. The unbeliever said: 
“Why did you not kill me?” He replied: “I was going to kill you for the sake of God. 
But  when  you  spat  at  me,  I  became  angered  and  the  purity  of  my  intention  was 
clouded by the inclinations of my soul. It is for this reason that I did not kill you.” The 
unbeliever replied: “If your religion is so pure and disinterested, it must be the truth.”9 
An occurrence worthy of note: When once a judge showed signs of anger while 
cutting off the  hand of a thief, the  just ruler who chanced to observe  him dismissed 
him  from  his  post.  For  if  he  had  cut  the  hand  in  the  name  of  the  Shari‘a,  his  soul 
would have  felt pity for the  victim;  he should have  cut it off  in a manner devoid of 
both  anger  and  mercy.  Since  the  inclinations  of  his  soul  had  had  some  share  in  his 
deed, he did not perform the act with justice. 

A  regrettable  social  condition  and  an  awesome  disease  affecting  the  life  of 
society,  fit  to  be  wept  over  by  the  heart  of  Islam:  To  forget  and  abandon  internal 
enmities  when  foreign  enemies  appear  and  attack  is  a  demand  of  social  welfare 
recognized and enacted even by the most primitive peoples. What then ails those who 
claim to be serving the Islamic community that at a time when  numberless enemies 
are  taking  up  positions  to  attack,  one  after  the  other,  they  fail  to  forget  their  petty 
enmities,  and  instead  prepare  the  ground  for  the  enemies’  attacks?  It  is  disgraceful 
savagery, and treason committed against the social life of Islam. 

A story to be pondered over: There were two groups of the Hasanan, a tribe of 

nomads, hostile to each other. Although more than maybe fifty  

                                                 
7 Qur’an, 40:12; 28:70; 6:57. 
8 Bukhari, Iman. 1; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 2; Musnad, v, 146. 
9 Shemseddin Sivasi, Manaqib-i Chahar Yar-i Guzin, 294. 

313

 

 

314

people  had  been  killed  on  each  side,  when  another  tribe  such  as  the  Sibgan  or 
Haydaran came out against them, those two hostile groups would forget their enmity 
and  fight  together,  shoulder  to  shoulder,  until  the  opposing  tribe  had  been  repelled, 
without ever once recalling their internal dissensions.  

O Believers! Do you know how many tribes of enemies have taken up position to 
attack the tribe of the people of belief? There are more than a hundred of them, like a 
series of concentric circles. The believers are obliged to take up defensive positions, 
each supporting the other and giving him a helping hand. Is it then at all fitting for the 
people  of  belief  that  with  their  biased  partisanship  and  hostile  rancour  they  should 
facilitate the attack of the enemy and fling open the doors for him to penetrate the fold 
of  Islam?  There  are  maybe  seventy  circles  of enemies,  including  the  misguided,  the 
atheist,  and  the  unbeliever,  each  of  them  as  harmful  to  you  as  all  the  terrors  and 
afflictions of this world, and each of them regarding you with greed, anger and hatred. 
Your  firm  weapon,  shield  and  citadel  against  all  of  them  is  none  other  than  the 
brotherhood of Islam. So realize just how contrary to conscience and to the interests 
of  Islam  it  is  to  shake  the  citadel  of  Islam  on  account  of  petty  hostilities  and  other 
pretexts! Know this, and come to your senses! 

According  to  a  noble  Hadith  of  the  Prophet  (UWBP),  noxious  and  awesome 
persons  like  Sufyan  and  the  Dajjal  will  come  to rule  over  the  godless  at  the  end  of 
time, and exploiting the greed, discord and hatred amongst the Muslims and mankind, 
they will need only a small force to reduce humanity to anarchy and the vast world of 
Islam to slavery.10 

O people of faith! If you do not wish to enter a humiliating condition of slavery, 

come to your senses and enter and take refuge in the citadel of:  

Indeed the believers are brothers,(49:10) 

to  defend  yourselves  against  those  oppressors  who  would  exploit  your  differences! 
Otherwise you will be able neither to protect your lives nor to defend your rights. It is 
evident  that  if  two  champions  are  wrestling  with  each  other,  even  a  child  can  beat 
them. If two mountains are balanced in the scales, even a small stone can disturb their 
equilibrium and cause one to rise and the other to fall. So O people of belief! Your 
strength  is  reduced to  nothing  as  a  result  of  your  passions  and  biased partisanships, 
and you can be defeated by the slightest forces. If you have any interest in your social 
solidarity, then make of the exalted principle of “The believers are together  

                                                 
10 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 529-30; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, viii, 286. 

314

 

 

315

like  a  well-founded  building,  one  part  of  which  supports  the  other”11  your  guiding 
principle  in  life!  Then  you  will  be  delivered  from  humiliation  in  this  world  and 
wretchedness in the hereafter. 

Sixth Aspect 

Spiritual  life  and  correctness  of  worship  will  suffer  as  a  result  of  enmity  and 
rancour, since the purity of intention that is the means of salvation will be damaged. 
For a biased person will desire superiority over his enemy in the good deeds that he 
performs and will be unable to act purely for the sake of God. He will also prefer, in 
his judgement and dealings, the one who takes his side; he will be unable to be just. 
Thus  the  purity  of  intention  and  the  justice  that  are  the  bases  of  all  good  acts  and 
deeds will be lost on account of enmity and hostility. 

The Sixth Aspect is extremely complex, but we will cut it short here since this is 

not the place to enlarge on it. 

                                                 
11 Bukhari, Salat, 88; Adab 36; Mazalim, 5; Muslim, Birr, 65; Tirmidhi, Birr, 18; Nasa’i, Zakat, 67; 
Musnad, vi, 405, 409. 

315

 

 

316

Second Topic 

it 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
is  Who  gives  all  sustenance,  Lord  of  Power  and 
Verily  God 
Steadfast.(51:58)  *  How  many  are  the  creatures  that  carry  not  their  own 
sustenance? It is God who provides for them and for you; He is All-Hearing, 
All-Knowing.(29:60) 

O  people  of  belief!  You  will  have  understood  by  now  how  harmful  is  enmity. 
Understand too that greed is another awesome disease, as harmful for the life of Islam 
as  enmity.  Greed  brings  about disappointment,  deficiency, and  humiliation;  it  is  the 
cause of deprivation and abjection. The humiliation and abjection of people who have 
leaped greedily upon the world, is a decisive proof of this truth. Greed demonstrates 
its evil effects throughout the animate world, from the most universal of species to the 
most particular of individuals. To seek out one’s sustenance while placing one’s trust 
in  God  will,  by  constrast,  bring  about  tranquillity  and  demonstrate  everywhere  its 
beneficient effects.  

Thus, fruit trees and plants, which are a species of animate being insofar as they 
require  sustenance,  remain  contentedly  rooted  where  they  are,  placing  their  trust  in 
God  and  not  evincing  any  greed;  it  is  for  this  reason  that  their  sustenance  hastens 
toward them. They breed too far more offspring than do the animals. The animals, by 
contrast, pursue their sustenance greedily, and for this reason are able to attain it only 
imperfectly  and at the cost of great effort. Within the animal  kingdom it is only  the 
young who, as  it were, evince their trust  in God by proclaiming their weakness and 
impotence;  hence  it  is  that  they  receive  in  full  measure  their  rightful  and  delicate 
sustenance from the treasury of divine mercy. But savage beasts that pounce greedily 
on  their  sustenance  can  hope  only  for  an  illicit  and  coarse  sustenance,  attained 
through  the  expenditure  of  great  effort.  These  two  examples  show  that  greed  is  the 
cause  of  deprivation,  while  trust  in  God  and  contentment  are  the  means  to  God’s 
mercy. 

In the human kingdom, some peoples have clung to the world more greedily and 
have  loved  its  life  with  more  passion  than  any  others,  but  the  usurious  wealth  they 
have  gained  with  great  efforts  is  merely  illicit  property  over  which  they  exercise 
temporary stewardship, and it benefits them little. It earns them, on the contrary, the 
blows of abjection and humiliation,  

 

 

316

317

of  death  and  insult,  that  are  rained  down  on  them  by  all  peoples.  This  shows  that 
greed is a source of humiliation and loss. There are in addition so many instances of a 
greedy person being exposed to loss that “the greedy is subject to disappointment and 
loss” has become a universally accepted truth. This being the case, if you love wealth, 
seek it not with greed but with contentment, so that you may have it in abundance. 

The  content  and  the  greedy  are  like  two  men  who  enter  the  audience-hall  of  a 
great personage. One of them says to himself: “It is enough that he should admit me 
so that I can escape from the cold outside. Even if he motions me to sit in the lowest 
position, I will count it as a kindness.” 

The  second  man  says  arrogantly,  as  if  he  had  some  right  in  the  matter  and 
everyone were obliged to respect him: “I should be assigned the highest position.” He 
enters  with  greed  and  fixes  his  gaze  on  the  highest  positions,  wishing  to  advance 
toward them. But the master of the  audience-hall turns him back and seats  him in a 
lower position. Instead of thanking him as he should, he is angered against him in his 
heart and criticizes him. The lord of the palace will be offended by him. 

The  first  man  enters  most  humbly  and  wishes  to  sit  in  the  lowest  position.  His 
modesty  pleases  the  lord  of  the  audience-hall,  and  he  invites  him  to  sit  in  a  higher 
position. His gratitude increases, and his thankfulness is augmented. 

Now this world is like an audience-hall of the Most Merciful One. The surface of 
the globe is like a banqueting spread laid out by His mercy. The differing degrees of 
sustenance and grades of bounty correspond to the seating positions in the audience-
hall. 

Furthermore,  even  in  the  minutest  of  affairs  everyone  can  experience  the  evil 
effects  of  greed.  For  example,  everyone  knows  in  his  heart  that  when  two  beggars 
request something, he will be offended by the one who greedily importunes him, and 
refuse his request; whereas he will take pity on the peaceable one and give him what 
he asks. 

Or to give another example, if  you are unable to fall asleep at night and wish to 
do so, you may succeed if you remain detached. But if you desire sleep greedily, and 
say: “Let me sleep, let me sleep,” then sleep will quit you entirely. 

Yet another example is this, that if you greedily await the arrival of someone for 
some  important purpose  and  continually  say:  “He  still  hasn’t  come,” ultimately  you 
will  lose  patience  and get  up  and  leave.  But one  minute  later  the  person  will  come, 
and your purpose will be frustrated. 

The reason for all this is as follows. The production of a loaf of bread requires a 

field to be cultivated and harvested, the grain to be taken to a  

 

 

317

318

mill, and the loaf to be baked in an oven. So too in the arrangement of all things there 
is a certain  slow deliberation decreed by God’s wisdom. If on account of greed one 
fails to act with slow deliberation, one will fail to notice the steps one must mount in 
the arrangement of all things; he will either fall or be unable to traverse the steps, and 
in either event will not reach his goal. 

O  brothers  giddied  by  preoccupation  with  your  livelihood,  and  drunk  on  your 
greed for this world! Greed is harmful and pernicious; how is it then that you commit 
all kinds of abject deed for the sake of your greed; accept all kinds of wealth, without 
concern  for  licit  or  illicit;  and  sacrifice  much  of  the  hereafter?  On  account  of  your 
greed  you  even  abandon one  of  the  most  important  pillars of  Islam,  the  payment  of 
zakat,  although  zakat  is  for  everyone  a  means  of  attracting  plenty  and  repelling 
misfortune. The one who does not pay zakat is bound to lose the amount of money he 
would otherwise have paid: either he will spend it on some useless object, or it will be 
taken from him by some misfortune. 

In  a  veracious  dream  that  came  to  me  during  the  fifth  year  of  the  First  World 

War, the following question was put to me:  

“What  is  the  reason  for  this  hunger,  financial  loss,  and  physical  trial  that  now 

afflicts the Muslims?” I replied in the dream: 

“From the wealth  He bestows upon us, God Almighty required from us either a 
tenth or a fortieth12 so that we may benefit from the grateful prayers of the poor, and 
rancour and envy may be prevented. But in our greed and covetousness we refused to 
give zakat, and God Almighty has taken from us a thirtieth where a fortieth was owed, 
and an eighth where a tenth was owed. 

“He required of us to undergo, for no more than one month each  year, a hunger 
with  seventy beneficial purposes. But we took pity on our instinctual souls, and did 
not  undergo  that  temporary  pleasurable  hunger.  God  Almighty  then  punished  us  by 
compelling  us  to  fast  for  five  years,  with  a  hunger  replete  with  seventy  kinds  of 
misfortune. 

“He also required of us, out of each period of twenty-four hours, one hour to be 
spent in a form of divine drill, pleasing and sublime, luminous and beneficial. But in 
our laziness we neglected the duty of prayer. That single hour was joined to the other 
hours  and  wasted.  As  penance,  God  Almighty  then  caused  us  to undergo  a  form of 
drill and physical exertion that took the place of prayer.” 

                                                 
12 A tenth, that is, of wealth like corn that every year yields a new crop; and a fortieth of whatever 
yielded a commercial profit in the course of the year. 

318

 

 

319

I then awoke, and upon reflection realized that an extremely important truth was 
contained  in  that  dream.  As  proven  and  explained  in  the  Twenty-Fifth  Word,  when 
comparing modern civilization with the principles of the Qur’an, all  immorality  and 
instability in the social life of man proceeds from two sources: 

The First: “Once my stomach is full, what do I care if others die of hunger?” 
The Second: “You work, and I’ll eat.” 
That which perpetuates these two is the prevalence of usury and interest on the 
one hand, and the abandonment of zakat on the other. The only remedy able to cure 
these two awesome social diseases lies in implementing zakat as a universal principle 
and in forbidding usury. Zakat is a most essential support of happiness not merely for 
individuals and particular societies, but for all of humanity. There are two classes of 
men:  the  upper  classes  and  the  common  people.  It  is  only  zakat  that  will  induce 
compassion  and  generosity  in  the  upper  classes  toward  the  common  people,  and 
respect and obedience in the common people toward the upper classes. In the absence 
of  zakat,  the  upper  classes  will  descend  on  the  common  people  with  cruelty  and 
oppression, and the common people will rise up against the upper classes in rancour 
and  rebellion.  There  will  be  a  constant  struggle,  a  persistent  opposition  between the 
two classes of men. It will finally result in the confrontation of capital and labour, as 
happened in Russia. 

O people of nobility and good conscience! O people of generosity and liberality! 
If acts of generosity are  not performed in the  name of zakat, there are three harmful 
results. The act may have no effect, for if you do not give in the name of God, you are 
in effect imposing an obligation, and imprisoning some wretched pauper with a sense 
of obligation. Then you will be deprived of his prayer, a prayer which would be most 
acceptable in the sight of God. In reality you are nothing but an official entrusted with 
the distribution of God Almighty’s bounties among  His servants; but if  you imagine 
yourself to be the owner of wealth, this  is an  act  of ingratitude for the bounties  you 
have received. If, on the contrary, you give in the name of zakat, you will be rewarded 
for  having  given  in  the  name  of  God  Almighty;  you  will  have  offered  thanks  for 
bounties received. The needy person too will not be compelled to fawn and cringe in 
front of you; his self-respect will not be injured, and his prayer on your behalf will be 
accepted. See how great is the difference between, on the one hand, giving as much as 
one  would  in  zakat,  but  earning  nothing  but  the  harm  of  hypocrisy,  fame,  and  the 
imposition of obligation; and, on the other hand, performing the same good deeds in 
the name of zakat, and thereby fulfilling a duty, and gaining  

 

 

319

320

a reward, the virtue of sincerity, and the prayers of those whom you have benefited? 

Glory be unto You; we have no knowledge save that which you have taught us; 

indeed, you are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

O  God,  grant  blessings  and  peace  to  our  master  Muhammad,  who  said:  “The 
believer is with respect to the believer like a firm building, of which one part supports 
the other,”13 and who said too that “Contentment is a treasure that never perishes,”14 
and to his Family and his Companions. And praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the 
Worlds. 

                                                 
13 Bukhari, Salat, 88; Adab, 36; Mazalim, 5; Muslim, Birr, 65; Tirmidhi, Birr, 18; Nasa’i, Zakat, 67; 
Musnad, vi, 405, 409. 
14 al-Suyuti, al-Fath al-Kabir, ii, 309. 

320

 

 

321

Conclusion 

In his Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

Concerning  Backbiting 

In the Fifth Point of the First Ray of the First Light of the Twenty-Fifth Word, a 
single Qur’anic verse having the effect of discouraging and restraining was shown to 
induce  repugnance  at  backbiting  in  six  miraculous  ways.  It  was  shown  too  how 
abominable a thing is backbiting in the view of the Qur’an, and that there is therefore 
no need for any further explanation of the subject. Indeed, after the Qur’an has made 
its declaration, there is neither the possibility nor the need for anything further. 
The Qur’an reproaches the backbiter with six reproaches in the verse: 

Would any among you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother?(49:12) 

and  forbids  him  to  commit  this  sin  with  six  degrees  of  severity.  When  the  verse  is 
directed to those persons actually engaged in backbiting, its meaning is the following. 
As is well-known, the “hamza” at the beginning of the verse has an interrogative 
sense. This interrogative sense penetrates all the words of the verse like water, so that 
each word acquires an additional meaning. Thus the first word asks, with its “hamza:” 
“Is  it  that  you  have  no  intelligence  capable  of  discrimination,  so  that  you  fail  to 
perceive the ugliness of this thing?” 

The  second  word  “like”  asks:  “Is  your  heart,  the  seat  of  love  and  hatred,  so 

corrupted that it loves the most repugnant of things?” 

The  third  word  “any  among  you”  asks:  “What  befell  your  sense  of  social  and 
civilized  responsibility  that  you  are  able  to  accept  something  poisonous  to  social 
life?” 

The  fourth  word  “to  eat  the  flesh”  asks:  “What  has  befallen  your  sense  of 

humanity that you are tearing your friend apart with your fangs like a wild animal?” 

The fifth word “of his brother” asks: “Do you have no fellow-feeling, no sense of 
kinship, that  you are able to sink  your teeth into some wretch who is tied to  you by 
numerous links of brotherhood? Do you have no intelligence that you are able to bite 
into your own limbs with your own teeth, in such lunatic fashion?” 

The sixth word “dead” asks: “Where is your conscience? Is your nature  

 

 

321

322

so  corrupt  that  you  abandon  all  respect  and  act  so  repugnantly  as  to  consume  your 
brother’s flesh?” 

According then to the total sense of the verse, as well as the indications of each of 
its  words,  slander  and  backbiting  are  repugnant  to  the  intelligence  and  the  heart,  to 
humanity and conscience, to nature and social consciousness. 

You see then that the  verse condemns backbiting in six miraculous degrees and 
restrains  men  from  it  in  six  miraculous  ways.  Backbiting  is  the  vile  weapon  most 
commonly used by the people of enmity, envy, and obstinacy, and the self-respecting 
will  never  stoop  to  employing  so  unclean  a  weapon.  Some  celebrated  person  once 
said:  “I  never  stoop  to  vexing  my  enemy  with  backbiting,  for  backbiting  is  the 
weapon of the weak, the low, and the vile.” 

Backbiting consists of saying that which would be a cause of dislike and vexation 
to the person in question if he were to be present and hear it. Even if what is said is 
true,  it  is  still  backbiting.  If  it  is  a  lie,  then  it  is  both  backbiting  and  slander  and  a 
doubly loathsome sin. 

Backbiting can be permissible in a few special instances: 
First: If a complaint be presented to some official, so that with his  help evil be 

removed and justice restored. 

Second: If a person contemplating co-operation with another comes to seek your 
advice,  and  you  say  to  him,  purely  for  the  sake  of  his  benefit  and  to  advise  him 
correctly,  without  any  self-interest:  “Do  not  co-operate  with  him;  it  will  be  to  your 
disadvantage.” 

Third:  If  the  purpose  is  not  to  expose  someone  to  disgrace  and  notoriety,  but 
simply  to  make  people  aware,  and  one  says:  “That  foolish,  confused  man  went  to 
such-and-such a place.” 

Fourth:  If  the  subject  of  backbiting  is  an  open  and  unashamed  sinner;  is  not 
troubled by evil, but on the contrary takes pride in the sins he commits; finds pleasure 
in his wrongdoing; and unhesitatingly sins in the most evident fashion. 

In  these  particular  cases,  backbiting  may  be  permissible,  if  it  be  done  without 
self-interest  and  purely  for  the  sake of  truth  and  communal  welfare.  But  apart  from 
them, it is like a fire that consumes good deeds like a flame eating up wood. 

If one  has engaged in backbiting, or willingly  listened to it, one should say: “O 
God,  forgive  me  and  him  concerning  whom  I  spoke  ill,”  and  say  to  the  subject  of 
backbiting, whenever one meets him: “Forgive me.” 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

                                                            S a i d  N u r s i 

 

 

322

323

The Twenty-Third Letter 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

Peace be upon you, and God’s blessings and mercy for ever, to the number of the 

seconds of the minutes of your life and the particles of your body! 

My Dear, Enterprising, Serious, True, Sincere, and Sagacious Brother! 
For brothers of the  hereafter and the truth like us, differences of time and place 
are no obstacle to their conversing and intimacy. Even if one is in the east, one in the 
west, one in the past, one in the future, one in this world, and one in the next, they still 
may  be  thought  of  as  being  together  and  may  converse.  Especially  those  who  have 
undertaken the same duty to achieve the same goal; they are as though united. Every 
morning I imagine that  you are here with me, and I make over a part, a third, of my 
spiritual gains to you. May God find them acceptable! In my prayers you are together 
with  Abdülmecid  and  Abdurrahman.  God  willing,  you  always  receive  your  share. 
Your  suffering  difficulties  in  respect  of  worldly  life  saddened  me  a  little,  for  your 
sake. But since this world is not eternal and good may come of disasters, it occurred 
to me to say on your behalf: “This too will pass.” I thought of the Hadith: “True life is 
the  life  of  the  hereafter.”1  I  recited  the  verse:  “God  is  with  those  who  patiently 
persevere.”(2:253) I said: “To God do we belong, and to Him  is our return.”(2:156) 
And I found consolation in place of you. If Almighty God loves one of His servants, 
He makes him feel disgust at the world and shows it to be ugly.2 God  

                                                 
1 Bukhari, Riqaq, 1; Jihad, 33, 110; Manaqib al-Athar, 9; Maghazi, 29; Muslim, Jihad, 126, 129; 
Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 55; Ibn Maja, Masajid, 3; Musnad, ii, 381; iii, 172, 180, 216, 276; v, 332. 
2 Tirmidhi, Tibb, 1; Musnad, v, 427; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 207; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-
Zawa’id, x, 285; al-Suyuti, Kanz al-‘Ummal, iii, 204. 

323

 

 

324

willing,  you  belong  to  that  class  of  His  loved  ones.  Do  not  let  the  increased 
difficulties preventing the  spreading of the  Words upset  you. God willing, when the 
amount you have distributed comes to manifest divine mercy, those light-filled seeds 
will open a profusion of flowers. 

You asked a  number of questions. My dear brother! The majority of the  Words 
and  Letters  that  have  been  written  occurred  to  my  heart  instantaneously  without  the 
exercise of will; and they turned out very  well. If  I reply to  you relying on my will 
and  strength of  knowledge  and  thought  like  the  Old  Said,  the  answers  will  turn  out 
dull and deficient. For some time now my heart has received no inspirations and the 
whip of my memory been broken; so I shall reply extremely briefly to each of them, 
so as not to deprive you of an answer. 

YOUR FIRST QUESTION  

What is the best way believers can pray for one another? 
T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  Their  prayer  has  to  be  within  the  bounds  of  what  is 
acceptable,  for  supplications  become  acceptable  under  certain  conditions;  their 
acceptability  increases  as  these  conditions  are  fulfilled. For  instance,  when  a  person 
wants to offer supplications, he should be purified spiritually by seeking forgiveness; 
then  he  should recite benedictions (salawat) for the Prophet (UWBP), an acceptable 
prayer,  for  intercession;  and  following  his  supplication  he  should  again  recite  the 
salawat.  For  a  prayer  offered  between  two  such  acceptable  prayers  itself  becomes 
acceptable; as is praying for another without their knowledge;3 and are the traditional 
supplications and prayers in the Qur’an and Hadiths. For example: 

O God! I beseech You to bestow forgiveness and  well-being on me and on 
so-and-so in religion, this world, and the hereafter.4 * O our Sustainer! Give 
us  good  in  this  world  and  good  in  the  hereafter,  and  defend  us  from  the 
torment of the Fire.(2:201) 

General  supplications  like  these  when  offered  sincerely  and  with  humility  and 
tranquillity of heart; and following the five daily  prayers, and the morning prayer in 
particular;  and  in  holy  places,  and  mosques  in  particular;  and  on  Fridays,  and 
particularly  during  “the  hour  when  prayers  are  answered;”  and  during  the  three 
months of Rajab, Sha‘ban, and Ramadan, and on the well-known holy nights, such as 
the Prophet’s (UWBP) birthday and Ragha’ib, and on the Night of Power in particular 
– it is to be strongly  

                                                 
3 Muslim, Dhikr, 86-8; Tirmidhi, Birr, 50; Abu Da’ud, Witr, 29; Ibn Maja, Manasik, 5. 
4 al-Nawawi, al-Adhkar, 74; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, i, 517. 

324

 

 

325

hoped  from  divine  mercy  that  such  supplications  will  be  accepted.5  The  results  of 
such acceptable prayers are either seen in this world exactly as requested, or they are 
accepted  in  respect  of  the  eternal  life  in  the  hereafter  of  the  one  who  offered  them. 
That is to say, if what was sought does not occur exactly as wished, it should not be 
said that the prayer was not accepted,6 but that it was accepted in a better form. 

YOUR SECOND QUESTION 

Since the phrase, “May God be pleased with him” is used for the Companions of 

the Prophet (UWBP), is it appropriate to use it in the same way for others? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  Yes,  it  may  be  used,  because  unlike  “Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace,”  which  is  a  mark  of  God’s  Messenger  (UWBP),  the  epithet, 
“May God be pleased with  him”  is  not particular to the  Companions, but should be 
used for persons who, like the Companions, attained to the “greater sainthood” known 
as “the legacy of prophethood,” rising to the station of God’s pleasure. Examples are 
the  four  Imams,  and  Shaikh  ‘Abd  al-Qadir Gilani,  Imam-i  Rabbani  (Shaikh  Ahmad 
Sirhindi),  and  Imam  Ghazali.  But  the  general  practice  among  religious  scholars  has 
been  to  use  “May  God  be  pleased  with  him”  for  the  Companions;  “May  God  have 
mercy on him” for the two generations succeeding them; “May God forgive him” for 
subsequent generations; and “May his mystery be sanctified” for the great saints.  

YOUR THIRD QUESTION 

Which  were  superior,  the  great  imams  and  interpreters  of  the  Holy  Law,  or  the 

shahs and spiritual poles of the true Sufi paths?   

T h e  A n s w e r : Not all the interpreters of the Law were superior to the shahs 
and  spiritual  poles,  only  Abu  Hanifa,  Malik,  Shafi‘i,  and  Ahmad  b.  Hanbal.  But  in 
some  respects,  some  wondrous  spiritual  poles  like  Shaikh  Gilani  reached  more 
brilliant  stations  in  particular  virtues.  However,  general  virtue  was  the  Imams’. 
Furthermore, some of the shahs of the Sufi paths were also interpreters of the Law; it 
cannot therefore be said that all interpreters of the Law were superior to the spiritual 
poles. But it may be said that after the  Companions and the Mahdi, the  four Imams 
were superior. 

                                                 
5 Ghazali, Ihya’ ‘Ulum al-Din, i, 457-66; al-Nawawi, al-Adhkar, 420-6. 
6 Bukhari, Da’wat, 22; Muslim, Dhikr, 90-1. 

325

 

 

326

YOUR FOURTH QUESTION  

persevere?”(2:153; 8:46) 

What  is  the  purpose  and  aim  of  the  words:  “God  is  with  those  who  patiently 

T h e  A n s w e r : As required by His name of All-Wise, Almighty God placed 
in all things an arrangement  like the steps of stairs. The  impatient man does not act 
with  slow  deliberation,  so  either  skips  some  of  the  steps  and  falls,  or  leaves  some 
deficient; he cannot mount to the roof of his goal. Greed is therefore the cause of loss. 
Patience however is the key to all difficulties, and the saying, “The greedy are subject 
to disappointment and loss,” and the Hadith, “Patience is the key to happiness,”7 have 
become  proverbial.  That  is  to  say,  Almighty  God’s  grace  and  favour  are  with  the 
patient. For patience is threefold:    

The First  is to patiently persevere in refraining from sin; this patience  is taqwa 

and manifests the meaning of the verse: 

God is with those who fear Him and restrain themselves.(2:194)  

The Second is patience  in the  face of calamity; this to place one’s trust in God 

and to submit to Him. It is to be honoured by the manifestation of these verses:  

God loves the patient.(3:146) * God loves those who put their trust in Him. 
(3:159)  

As  for  impatience,  it  amounts  to  complaining  about  God,  and  to  criticizing  His 
actions, accusing  His mercy, and not liking  His  wisdom. For sure, man is weak and 
powerless,  and  weeps  complainingly  at  the  blows  of  misfortune,  but  his  complaint 
must be to Him,  not about Him. It should resemble Jacob’s (Upon whom be peace) 
words: 

He said: I only complain of my distraction and anguish to God.(12:86) 

That is to say, he should complain to God, not lament saying: “What have I done that 
this  should  have  happened  to  me?”  as  though  complaining  to  other  human  beings 
about God; to excite the sympathy of impotent humans is harmful and meaningless.  

The  Third  Sort of  Patience  is  patient  perseverance  in  worship,  which  raises  a 
person to the station of being beloved of God. It urges him towards perfect worship of 
God and servitude of Him, which is the most elevated station.   

                                                 
7 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 21. 

326

 

 

327

YOUR FIFTH QUESTION  

Fifteen  is  accepted  as  the  age  of  discretion.  How  did  God’s  Messenger  (Upon 

whom be blessings and peace) worship before his prophetic mission? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e r  :  He  used  to  worship  in accordance  with what  remained  of 
Abraham’s (Upon whom be peace) religion, which was still extant in Arabia though 
in very obscure form. But this was his own choice, to perform a good act, not because 
he was obliged or compelled in any way. This truth is lengthy, so let it remain at that 
for now. 

YOUR SIXTH QUESTION  

What was the wisdom in his prophethood commencing when he was forty  years 
of  age,  which  is  reckoned  to  be  the  age  of  perfect  maturity,  and  his  blessed  life 
continuing for sixty-three years? 

T h e  A n s w e r : There were numerous purposes and instances of wisdom in 
this.  One  of  them  is  as  follows:  prophethood  brings  with  it  extremely  heavy 
responsibility. To bear it, the intellectual abilities have to mature and capacity of the 
heart, increase and be perfected. Forty is the age they are most perfectly developed. In 
addition, the period of youth, when the passions of the soul are enflamed, the blood is 
fiery and exuberant, and worldly ambitions are intense, is not fitting for the duties of 
prophethood, which are purely divine,  sacred, and pertain to the  hereafter.  However 
serious and sincere a man is before the age of forty, the suspicion that he is working 
for  worldly  renown  might  occur  to  those  who  themselves  seek  fame.  He  could  not 
easily  be  exonerated  in  the  face  of  their  accusations.  But  after  the  age  of  forty,  the 
descent to the  grave begins, and the  hereafter  looms larger for such a man than this 
world.  He  can  be  easily  vindicated  by  his  actions  and  works,  which  look  to  the 
hereafter, and he is successful. And others too are saved from thinking ill of him. 

When it comes to his blessed life lasting sixty-three years, one of the instances of 
wisdom in it is this: the believers are charged by the Shari‘a to love and respect God’s 
Most Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) to the utmost degree, to 
feel repelled at nothing about him at all, and to look on everything about him as good. 
Almighty  God,  therefore,  did  not  leave  His  Noble  Beloved  (UWBP)  to  live  the 
difficult,  troublesome  years  of  old  age  after  sixty-three;  He  rather  sent  him  to  the 
Sublime Court at that age, which was the average life expectancy of the community of 
which he was the leader. He took him to Himself, showing that he was the leader in 
every respect. 

 

 

327

328

YOUR SEVENTH QUESTION 

 Is the following a Hadith, and what does it mean? “The best of youths are those 
who resemble men of mature age, while the worst men of middle age are those who 
resemble youths.”8  

T h e  A n s w e r : I have heard that it is a Hadith. Its meaning is this: “The best 
youth  is the one who thinks about death like an elderly person, and working  for the 
hereafter,  avoids  joining  those  who  become  captive  to  the  passions  of  youth  and 
drown in  heedlessness. And the worst of  your elderly people is the one who tries to 
resemble the young in heedlessness and passion, and follows the lusts of the soul like 
a child.” 

The  correct  form  of  the  second  part  you  saw  in  the  piece  is  as  follows.  I  have 
hung  it  above my  head  for  the wisdom  it  teaches.  I  look  it  at  it  every morning  and 
evening and receive instruction: 

If you want a friend, God is sufficient. Yes, if He is  your friend, everything is 

friendly. 

If you want companions, the Qur’an is sufficient. For in the imagination one 
meets  with  the  prophets  and  angels  in  it,  observes  the  events  in  which  they  were 
involved, and becomes familiar with them.  

If  you  want  possessions,  contentment  is  sufficient.  Yes,  the  person  who  is 

content is frugal; and the frugal person receives the blessing of plenty. 

If  you  want  an  enemy,  the  soul  is  sufficient.  Yes,  the  person  who  fancies 
himself is visited with calamities and meets with difficulties, whereas the one who is 
not fond of himself, finds happiness, and receives mercy. 

If you want advice, death is sufficient. Yes, the person who thinks of death is 

saved from love of this world, and works in earnest for the hereafter.  

I am adding an eighth to your seven matters. It is like this: a couple of days ago, a 

Qur’an reciter read part of Sura Yusuf as far as, 

Take  my  soul  [at  death]  as  one  submitting  to  Your  will  [as  a  Muslim],  and 
unite me with the righteous.(12:101) 

This point occurred to me in a flash: everything  concerning the Qur’an and belief  is 
valuable; however insignificant a point appears to be, it has great value. Nothing that 
helps to win eternal happiness is insignificant. In which case, it may not be said that 
this  is  only  a  small  point and  not  worth  explaining  or being  given  importance.  And 
certainly, the first student and  

                                                 
8 ‘Ali Mawardi, Adab al-Dunya wa’l-Din, 27; Ghazali, Ihya’ ‘Ulum al-Din, i, 142; al-Manawi, al-Fayd 
al-Qadir, iii, 487. 

328

 

 

329

person  addressed  in  matters  of  this  kind,  who  appreciates  the  fine  points  of  the 
Qur’an, Ibrahim Hulûsi, wants to hear this point! In which case, listen to it: 

It  is  a  fine  point  about  the  finest  of  stories.  An  elevated,  subtle,  happy,  and 

miraculous point of the verse,  

Take my soul [at death] as one submitting to Your will [as a Muslim], and 
unite me with the righteous,(12:101) 

which announces that the story of Joseph (Upon whom be peace), the best of stories, 
has reached its conclusion. It is this: the sorrows of death and separation at the end of 
other  happy  stories  sour  the  pleasure  the  listener  has  received  from  the  story  in  his 
imagination, and dispel it. Especially if they describe death and separation just when 
recounting  the  moment  of  perfect  joy  and  happiness;  this  is  even  more  painful  and 
causes  those  listening  to  cry  out  in  sorrow.  However,  although  this  verse  mentions 
Joseph’s death just at the most brilliant part of his story, when he is Ruler of Egypt, 
united  with  his  mother  and  father,  fondly  meeting  with  his  brothers,  and  is 
experiencing  the  greatest  worldly  happiness  and  joy,  it  does  so  in  such  a  way  as  to 
say: Joseph himself asked Almighty God for his death in order to experience greater 
happiness and a more brilliant situation; and he did die and did receive that happiness.  
That  is  to  say,  there  is  beyond  the  grave  a  happiness  and  joy  greater  than  the 
pleasurable  happiness  of  this  world,  so  that  while  in  that  most  joyful  worldly 
situation, a truth-seeing person like Joseph (Upon whom be peace) wished for bitter 
death, so as to receive that other happiness. 

So note this eloquence of the All-Wise Qur’an, and the way it announces the end 
of the story of Joseph. It causes not sorrow and regret to those listening to it, but gives 
good tidings and adds further joy. It also gives guidance, saying: Work for beyond the 
grave, for it is there that true happiness and pleasure will be found! It also points out 
Joseph’s exalted veraciousness, saying: Even the most brilliant and joyful situation of 
this  world  did  not  cause  him  to  become  heedless;  it  did  not  captivate  him;  he  still 
wanted the hereafter. 

                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

 

 

329

 

330

The Twenty-Fourth Letter 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
God does what He wishes, and decrees what He wills. 

Q u e s t i o n : How can the solicitous nurturing, the purposeful and beneficial 
planning,  the  loving  kindness  of  the  names  of  All-Compassionate,  All-Wise,  and 
Loving, which are among the greatest of the divine  names, be reconciled with death 
and  non-existence,  decline  and  separation,  and  disaster  and  hardship,  which  are 
awesome and terrible? Very well, man goes to eternal happiness so we can tolerate his 
passing down the road of death, but how about the delicate species of trees and plants, 
and the  lovely  flowers, which are all  living creatures, and the animal species, which 
are worthy of existence,  lovers of  life, and desire permanent life? What compassion 
and  kindness  are  there  in  their  continuously  without  exception  being  annihilated,  in 
their being swiftly despatched to non-existence without being allowed to so much as 
open their eyes, in their being made to toil without so much as taking a breath, in their 
being changed by calamities with  not one of them being  left in peace, in their being 
killed  without  exception,  in  their  dying  with  not  one  of  them  remaining,  in  their 
departing with none of them being gratified – what wisdom and purpose, what favour 
and mercy, are there in this? 

T h e  A n s w e r : Through five ‘Signs,’ which show the necessitating cause and 
reason, and five ‘Indications,’ which point out the aims and benefits, we shall try to 
look  from  afar  at  the  mighty  truth  that  solves  this  question,  and is extremely broad, 
profound, and elevated. 

 

331

First Station 

 [This consists of five Signs] 

FIRST SIGN 

As  is  described  at  the  end  of  the  Twenty-Sixth  Word,  when  making a  precious 
garment, ornamented with jewels and embroidery, a skilful craftsman employs a poor 
man  in  return  for  a  commensurate  wage.  In  order  to  display  his  skill  and  art,  he 
dresses the man in the garment, then measures and cuts it, and lengthens and shortens 
it;  making  the  man  sit  down  and  stand  up,  he  gives  it  various  forms.  Does  the 
wretched man have the right to say to the craftsman: “Why are you meddling with this 
garment  which  makes  me  beautiful,  altering  and  changing  it?  Why  are  you  making 
me stand up and sit down, disturbing me and causing me trouble?” 

In exactly the same way, in order to display the perfections of His art through the 
embroideries  of  His  names,  the  All-Glorious  Maker  takes  the  essential  nature  of 
beings  as  a  model,  then  He  clothes  them  all  and  especially  living  creatures  in  the 
garment  of  a  body  bejewelled  with  senses,  and  inscribes  it  with  the  pen  of  divine 
decree and determining, thus displaying the manifestation of His names. In addition, 
He gives to each one of them a perfection, a pleasure, an effulgence, in a way suitable 
to it and as a wage. 

Does  anything  have  the  right,  then,  to  say  to  the  All-Glorious  Maker,  who 
exemplifies  the  meaning  of,  “the  Lord  of  All  Dominion  has  free  disposal  over  His 
realms as He wishes:” “You are giving me trouble and disturbing me.”? God forbid! 
Beings have no rights before the Necessarily Existent One, nor can they claim them. 
What falls to them is, by offering thanks and praise, to carry out what is required by 
the degree of existence He has given them. For the degrees of existence that are given 
are  occurrences,  and  each  requires  a  cause.  Degrees  that  are  not  given  are 
possibilities,  and  possibilities  are  non-existent  as  well  as  being  infinite.  As  for 
instances of non-existence, they do not require a cause. For example, minerals cannot 
say: “Why weren’t we plants?”; they cannot complain. What falls to them is to offer 
thanks to their Creator for having been given mineral existence. And plants may not 
complain asking why they were  not animals; what is due to them is to offer thanks, 
for they have received life as well as existence. As for animals, they cannot complain 
that they are not humans; what  

 

332

is incumbent on them, since they have been given the precious substance of spirit in 
addition to life and existence, is to offer thanks. And so on. 

O  querulous  man!  You  did  not  remain  non-existent;  you  were  clothed  in  the 
bounty of existence. You tasted life; you neither remained inanimate, nor were made 
an animal. You received the bounty of Islam; you did not remain in misguidance. You 
have experienced the bounties of good health and well-being! 

O ungrateful one!  Where did  you win the right  not to offer thanks  in return for 
the degrees of existence Almighty God has given you as a pure bounty? How is it that 
because exalted bounties that are contingencies and non-existent and that  you do not 
deserve  have  not  been  given  you,  you  complain  about  Almighty  God  with 
meaningless  greed,  and  are ungrateful  for  the  bounties  you  have  received?  If  a  man 
rises to an elevated position, such as climbing to the top of a minaret, and finds a high 
station, and on every  step receives  a  large bounty, then does not thank the one who 
gave him the bounties and complainingly asks why he did not rise even higher, how 
wrong  he  would  be!  What  an  ungrateful  denial  of  the  bounties,  what  a  great 
foolishness it would be, as even a lunatic would understand! 

O  discontented  greedy,  thriftless  wasteful,  unjustly  complaining,  heedless  man! 
Know  certainly  that  contentment  is  profitable  thanks,  greed  is 
loss-causing 
ingratitude,  and  frugality,  fine  and  beneficial  respect  for  bounties.  As  for 
wastefulness,  it  is  ugly  and  harmful  contempt  for  bounties.  If  you  have  any 
intelligence, accustom yourself to being content, and try to be satisfied with little! If 
you cannot endure it, say: “O Most Patient One!” and request patience. Be  satisfied 
with your lot and do not complain! Understand who is complaining about whom, and 
be silent. If  you have to complain, then complain about  your soul to God Almighty, 
for that’s where the fault lies. 

SECOND SIGN 

As is stated at the end of the last matter of the Eighteenth Letter, one instance of 
wisdom in the All-Glorious Creator’s constantly changing and renewing beings in an 
astonishing and awesome way through the activity of His dominicality is as follows: 

Activity  and  motion  in  creatures  arise  from  an  appetite,  a  desire,  a  pleasure,  a 
love. It may be said that there is a sort of pleasure in all activity; or that activity is a 
sort of pleasure, even. Pleasure too is turned towards a perfection; indeed, it is a sort 
of  perfection.  Since  activity  indicates  perfection,  pleasure,  beauty;  and  since  the 
Necessarily  Existent  One,  who  is  absolute perfection  and  the  Perfect  One  of  Glory, 
unites in His essence, attributes,  

 

333

and  names  every  sort  of  perfection;  for  sure,  in  a  manner  fitting  for  the  necessary 
existence and holiness of the Necessarily Existent Essence, in a form suitable to His 
absolute  riches  and  essential  self-sufficiency,  in  a  way  appropriate  to  His  absolute 
perfection  and  freedom  from  defect,  He  has  a  boundless  sacred  compassion  and 
infinite pure love. Of a certainty, there is an infinite holy eagerness arising from that 
sacred  compassion  and  pure  love;  and  from  that  holy  eagerness  arises  an  infinite 
sacred joy. And arising from that sacred joy, is, if the term is permissible, an infinite 
holy pleasure. And from this holy pleasure and from the gratitude and perfections of 
creatures which result from the emergence and unfolding of their potentialities within 
the activity of His power, arise, if one may say so, an infinite sacred gratification and 
holy  pride  pertaining  to  that  Most  Merciful  and  Compassionate  Essence.  It  is  these 
that  necessitate  a boundless activity. And that boundless activity  in turn necessitates 
boundless  change  and  transformation,  alteration  and  destruction.  And  the  boundless 
change and transformation necessitate death and extinction, decline and separation. 

At  one  time,  the  benefits  shown  by  human  science  and  philosophy1  concerning 
the  aims  of beings  appeared  to  me  to be  extremely  insignificant.  I  understood  from 
this  that  such  philosophy  leads  only  to  futility.  Consequently,  leading  philosophers 
either  fall  into  the  swamp  of  nature,  or  they  become  Sophists,  or  they  deny  divine 
knowledge and choice, or they call the Creator “self-necessitating.” 

At that point, divine mercy sent the name of All-Wise to my aid, and it showed 
me  the  great  aims  of  creatures.  That  is  to  say,  every  creature,  every  artefact,  is  a 
dominical  missive  for  conscious  beings  to  study.  This  aim  satisfied  me  for  a  year. 
Then the wonders in the art of beings were unfolded to me, and the former aim began 
to  seem  deficient.  Another,  much  greater  aim  became  apparent,  which  was  that  the 
main aims of creatures look to their Maker. I understood that it consists of creatures’ 
presenting to His gaze the perfections of His art, the embroideries of His names, the 
embellishments of His wisdom, and the gifts of His mercy; it is their being mirrors to 
His beauty and perfections. This aim satisfied me for a long time, then the miracles of 
divine power and attributes of dominicality (şuûnât-ı rubûbiyet) in the extremely swift 
changes and transformations within the astonishing activity in the art and creation of 
things  became  apparent.  The  former  aim  too  began  to  appear  insufficient.  I 
understood that a necessitat 

                                                 
1 Human science and philosophy refers to those philosophies which are derived from human reason and 
which hold science to be the source and measure of truth rather than divine revelation. [Tr.] 

 

334

ing  cause,  a  motive,  was  necessary  as  great  as  that  latter  aim.  It  was  then  that  the 
causes in this second Sign and the aims in the Indications to follow became apparent. 
It was made known to me with complete certainty that the activity of divine power in 
the universe and the constant flood of beings are so meaningful that through them the 
All-Wise Maker causes all the realms of beings in the universe to speak. It is as if the 
beings of the earth and the skies and their motion and actions are the words of their 
speech;  their  motion  is  their  speech.  That  is,  the  motion  and  decline  arising  from 
activity is speech glorifying God. The activity in the universe is the universe’s silent 
speech and that of the varieties of its beings; their being made to speak. 

THIRD SIGN 

Things do not go to non-existence, they rather pass  from the realm of power to 
the  realm  of  knowledge;  they  go  from  the  Manifest  World  to  the  World  of  the 
Unseen; they turn from the world of change and transience to the worlds of light and 
eternity. In reality, the beauty and perfection in things pertain to the divine names and 
are  their  impresses  and  manifestations.  Since  the  names  are  eternal  and  their 
manifestations,  perpetual,  certainly  their  impresses  will  be  renewed,  refreshed,  and 
made beautiful. Things do not vanish into non-existence; their relative determinations 
change;  their  realities,  essences,  and  identities,  from  which  spring  their  beauty  and 
loveliness, effulgence and perfection, are enduring.  

The  beauty  of  beings  with  no  spirits  pertain  directly  to  the  divine  names;  the 
honour  is  theirs;  praise  is  due  to  them;  the  beauty  is  theirs;  love  goes  to  them;  they 
suffer no harm on those mirrors changing. 

For beings with spirits but no intellect, death is not a departure for extinction, a 
vanishing  into  non-existence;  it  is  to  be  saved  from  physical  existence  and  the 
turbulent  duties  of  life.  The  beings  make  over  the  fruits  of  the  duties  they  have 
performed  to  their  spirits.  Relying  on  a  divine  name,  their  immortal  spirits  persist; 
indeed, they attain a happiness worthy of them.  

For beings that possess both spirit and intellect, death is anyway a journeying to 
everlasting happiness, to the eternal realm, which is a spring of perfections, material 
and  non-material,  and  to  such  other  dwelling-places  of  the  All-Wise  Maker  as  the 
Intermediate Realm, the World of Similitudes, and the Spirit World, which all surpass 
this  world  in  beauty  and  luminosity.  Their  passing  does  not  lead  to  their  death  and 
extinction, separation and non-existence, but to their attaining perfection. 

I n  S h o r t : Since the All-Glorious Maker exists and He is Eternal, and  

 

335

since  His  attributes  and  names  are  perpetual  and  everlasting;  certainly  His  names’ 
manifestations  and  impresses  are  renewed,  affording  them  a  sort  of  perpetualness; 
they  are  not  destroyed  and  do  not  just  disappear;  they  are  not  ephemeral  and 
despatched to non-being. It is clear that by reason of his humanity, man is connected 
with most other beings; he receives pleasure at their happiness and is grieved at their 
destruction.  He  feel  more  grief  at  the suffering  of  living  creatures, of  humankind  in 
particular,  and  particularly  the  people  of  perfection  he  loves  and  admires;  and  his 
happiness is greater at their happiness. Like a fond mother, he even sacrifices his own 
happiness and comfort for theirs. Thus, through the light of the Qur’an and mystery of 
belief, all believers – in accordance with their degree – may be happy at the happiness 
of  other  beings,  and  at  their  continued  existence  and  being  saved  from  nothingness 
and their being valuable dominical missives; they may gain a light as extensive as the 
world. Everyone may profit from this light according to his degree. As for the people 
of misguidance,  in addition to their own pains they are  grieved at the destruction of 
beings, at their transience and apparently being despatched to non-existence – and if 
they have spirits, at their suffering. That is to say, their unbelief fills their world with 
non-existence; it empties it over their heads, causing them hell before they go there. 

FOURTH SIGN 

As we have said in many places, a monarch has various offices and departments 
proceeding  from  such  titles  of  his  as  Sultan,  Khalifa,  Judge,  and  Commander-in-
Chief.  In  the  same  way,  Almighty  God’s  Most  Beautiful  Names  have  innumerable 
different  sorts  of  manifestations.  All  the  different  sorts  of  creatures  arise  from  the 
varieties of manifestations. Thus, by virtue of the fact that every possessor of beauty 
and perfection  has an  innate desire to see and display  his beauty and perfection, the 
names  –  since  they  are  constant  and  eternal  –  want  to  be  displayed  in  permanent 
fashion on account of the Most Pure and Holy Essence. That  is to say, they want to 
see  their  impresses;  that  is,  to  see  in  the  mirrors  of  their  embroideries  the 
manifestation of their beauty and reflection of their perfection; that is, to renew every 
instant the mighty book of the universe and the multifarious missives of beings; that 
is, to constantly write them anew; that is, to write thousands of different missives on a 
single page and to display each missive to the witnessing gaze of the Sacred Essence, 
the Most Pure and Holy One, who is signified; and in addition, to exhibit them to the 
meditative  gazes  of  sentient  beings,  and  to  cause  them  to  read  them.  Consider  the 
following poem, which alludes to this truth: 

 

336

The leaves of the book of the world are of varieties incalculable, 
Its letters and words, too, are of number infinite; 
Inscribed on the workbench of the Preserved Tablet of reality, 
An embodied meaningful word, is each being in the world. 
Study the lines of the universe; for they are missives to you from the Sublime 

Assembly. 

FIFTH SIGN 

The fifth Sign consists of two points. 
F i r s t  P o i n t :  Since Almighty God exists, everything exists. Since they have 
a relation with Almighty God, all things exist for everything. For through the mystery 
of unity, through their relation with the Necessarily Existent One, all beings become 
connected with all other beings. This means that through the mystery of unity, every 
being that knows its relation with the Necessarily Existent One, or whose relation is 
known, becomes connected to all beings since they are connected to Him. This means 
that by virtue of that relation, all beings may manifest endless lights of existence. In 
that  respect,  for  them  there  is  no  separation  or  death.  To  live  for  a  single  passing 
second yields innumerable lights of existence. Whereas if there is no such relation or 
it is not known, the being or person manifests infinite separations and deaths. For in 
the face of every being with which he could have been connected, he is exposed to a 
separation, a parting, a death. That is, he burdens his personal existence with endless 
instances  of  non-existence  and  separation.  If  he  were  to  remain  in  existence  for  a 
million years even (without connection), it would not be equal to living for an instant 
with  the  relation  mentioned  above.  The  people  of  reality  (ehl-i  hakikat)  have  said 
therefore: “Illumined existence for a passing instant is preferable to a million years of 
profitless  existence.”  It  is  also  because  of  this  that  verifiers  of  the  realities  (ehl-i 
tahkik) have said: “The  lights of existence become apparent through recognizing the 
Necessarily  Existent  One.”  That  is  to  say:  the  universe  is  seen  to  be  full  of  angels, 
spirit  beings,  and  intelligent  beings,  bathed  in  lights  of  existence.  Whereas  without 
them, the darkness of non-existence and pains of death and separation encompass all 
beings. In such a view, the world appears to be an empty, desolate wasteland. 

Indeed, all the  fruits of a tree  have a relation with all the other fruits, and since 
through  the  relation  they  are  all  friends  and  brothers,  each  possesses  accidental 
existences to their number. But if one of the fruits is plucked from the tree, it suffers a 
separation and death in the face of all the other fruits; they all become as though non-
existent for it; it remains in the resulting darkness of external non-existence. 

 

337

In  exactly  the  same  way,  in  so  far  as  they  are  connected  to  the  power  of  the 
Single Eternally Besoughted One, all things exist for everything. The absence of such 
a relation results for all things in external non-existences to the number of things. 

So see from this Sign the vastness of the lights of belief (îmân) and the terrifying 
darkness of misguidance. That is, belief is the mark of the elevated truth described in 
this Sign; and it may be benefited from through belief. In the absence of belief, just as 
for  someone  who  is  blind,  deaf,  dumb,  and  stupid  everything  is  non-existent,  so  is 
everything non-existent and dark for one without belief. 

S e c o n d  P o i n t :  The world and all things have three faces: 
The First Face looks to the divine names and is their mirror. Death, separation, 
and  non-existence  cannot  intrude  on  this  face;  it  rather  manifests  renewal  and 
remaking afresh. 

The Second Face looks to the hereafter and gazes upon the World of Eternity; it 
is its arable field. Here, enduring fruits and produce are raised. It serves eternity and 
makes  ephemeral  things  as  though  eternal.  On  this  face  too  there  is  no  death  and 
decline, but the manifestations of life and eternity. 

The  Third  Face  looks  to  transient  beings,  that  is,  to  us.  It  is  the  beloved  of 
ephemeral beings and those who follow the caprices of their souls; the place of trade 
for  the  conscious;  the  arena  of  trial  and  examination  for  those  charged  with  duties. 
Thus, the salve and cure for the pains and wounds of the transience and decline, the 
death and extinction, on this third face, are the manifestations of life and eternity in its 
inner face. 

I n  S h o r t : This flood of beings, these travelling creatures, are roving mirrors 
and ever-changing places of manifestation for the renewal of the Necessarily Existent 
One’s lights of creation and existence. 

 

338

Second Station 

 [The Second Station  consists  of  an Introduction  and  five  Indications. 
The Introduction contains two Topics.] 

F  i  r  s  t    T  o p i  c  :  In  each  of  the  following  five Indications  is  a  comparison, 
written  in  the  form  of  a  dull,  short-ranged  telescope  with  which  to  observe  the 
attributes  of  dominicality.  The  comparisons  cannot  contain  the  reality  of  those 
attributes;  they  cannot  encompass  them  and  be  the  measure  of  them,  but  they  can 
assist  in  looking  at  them.  Any  phrases  or  expressions  in  the  comparisons,  or  in  the 
previous Signs, unfitting for the attributes of the Most Pure and Holy Essence are the 
fault of the comparisons. 

For example, the meanings of pleasure, joy, and gratification known by us cannot 
express  the  sacred  attributes;  each  rather  indicates  an  observatory  and  is  an  aid  to 
reflective thought. Also, by showing in a small example the tip of an encompassing, 
mighty law of dominicality, each proves the reality of the law present in the attributes 
of dominicality. For example,  it  is said that  a  flower departs from existence  leaving 
thousands  of  existences  behind  it.  This  demonstrates  a  mighty  law  of  dominicality 
that is in force in all the beings of spring, indeed, of all the world. 

Yes, through whichever law the All-Compassionate Creator changes and renews 
the  feathered dress of a bird, through the same  law that All-Wise Maker renews the 
dress of the globe of the earth every  year. Through the same law, He transforms the 
shape of the world every century. And through the same law, He will change the form 
of the universe at the resurrection of the dead. 

Through  whichever  law  He  impels  particles  like  Mevlevi  dervishes,  He  makes 
the  earth  spin  through  the  same  law,  like  an  ecstatic  Mevlevi  dervish  rising  up  to 
dance  the  sama‘.  And  through  that  law,  He  causes  worlds  to  revolve,  and  the  solar 
system to travel through space. 

Through  whichever  law  He  renews,  repairs,  and  dissolves  the  particles  in  your 
body’s cells, through the same law He renews your garden every year, making it anew 
many times every season. And through the same law, He renews the face of the earth 
every spring, drawing a fresh veil over its face. 

Through whichever law that All-Powerful Maker raises a fly to life, through the 

same law He restores to life the plane-tree opposite your win 

 

339

dow every spring; and through that law, He raises the globe of the earth to life in the 
spring;  and  through  the  same  law  He  will  raise  creatures  to  life  at  the  resurrection. 
The Qur’an alludes to this with the verse, 

Your creation and your resurrection is but as a single soul.(31:28) 

And so on; you can make further examples in the same way. 

There are many laws of dominicality like these which are in force from particles 
to  the  totality  of  the world. Consider  the  immensity  of  these  laws  within  dominical 
activity;  note  carefully  their  breadth  and  see  the  meaning  of  unity  within  them. 
Understand that each law is a proof of divine unity. Yes, since all these numerous and 
immense laws are the manifestations of knowledge and will, and since they are both 
the  same  and  all-encompassing,  they  offer  certain  proof  for  the  Maker’s  unity, 
knowledge, and will.  

Thus,  most  of  the  comparisons  in  the  Words  show  through  small  examples  the 
tips of laws like these, and by doing so, point to the existence of the same law in the 
matter claimed. Since the existence of the law is demonstrated through a comparison, 
it proves the assertion as categorically as a logical proof. That is to say, most of the 
comparisons  in  the  Words  should  be  considered  categorical  proofs  and  certain 
arguments. 

S e c o n d  T o p i c :  As is described in the Tenth Truth of the Tenth Word, 
however many flowers and fruits there are on a tree, each of them has aims, purposes, 
and instances of wisdom to that number. These instances of wisdom are of three sorts: 

One sort looks to the Maker and displays the embroideries of His names. 
Another sort looks to intelligent and conscious beings, and in their view, things 

are valuable missives and meaningful words. 

Another sort looks to the being itself and to its own life and perpetuation; and if 

beneficial for man, it contains instances of wisdom accordingly. 

At one time, while contemplating  how all beings  have  such  numerous aims, the 
following phrases occurred to me in Arabic, which, like notes forming the basis of the 
following Indications, allude to those universal aims: 

These  glorious  beings  are  flowing  places  of  manifestation  and  roving 
mirrors for the renewal of the manifestations of the lights of His creativity – 
Glory be unto Him! – through the changing of their relative determinations, 
* Firstly, and by preserving their beautiful meanings and their identities in 
the World of Similitudes; * Secondly, and producing truths pertaining to the 
World of the Unseen and the weavings of the  

 

340

Preserved  Tablet;  *  Thirdly,  and  spreading  the  fruits  of  the  hereafter  and 
publishing  everlasting  panoramas;  *  Fourthly,  and  proclaiming  dominical 
glorifications  and  making  known  what  the  divine  names  necessitate;  * 
Fifthly,  so  that  the  divine  attributes  become  apparent  and  the  aspects  of 
divine knowledge. 

These five sections comprise the bases of the Indications we shall discuss below. 
Yes,  all  beings,  and  particularly  living  beings,  possess  on  five  levels  different  aims 
and  instances  of  wisdom  and  purposes.  Like  a  tree  produces  fruit  on  branches  one 
over the other, so all living beings have five different levels of aims and purposes. 

O ephemeral man! If you want your own tiny seed-like reality to be transformed 
into an eternal fruit-bearing tree, and to obtain the ten levels of fruits and ten sorts of 
aims pointed out in the five  Indications, acquire true faith. Otherwise,  in addition to 
being deprived of all of them, you will be squeezed into that seed and you will rot! 

FIRST INDICATION 

Firstly: through the changing of their relative determinations, and by preserving 

their beautiful meanings and their identities in the World of Similitudes. 

This section expresses the following: although a being apparently disappears into 
non-existence after departing from [external] existence, the meanings it has expressed 
are  preserved  and  perpetuated.  Its  identity,  form,  and  essential  nature  also  are 
preserved in the World of Similitudes, on the Preserved Tablets, which are samples of 
the  World  of  Similitudes,  and  in  memories,  which  are  samples  of  the  Preserved 
Tablets. That is, the being loses its visible existence and gains hundreds of immaterial 
existences and existences in knowledge. 

For  example,  in  order  to print  a  page  in  a  printing-press,  the  type  is  set  up  and 
arranged.  Then  after  the  page  has  bequeathed  its  form  and  identity  on  many  pages 
when  printed  and  after  it  has  proclaimed  its  meanings  to  many  minds,  the 
arrangement of the type is changed. For no need remains for it and other pages have 
to be printed. 

In exactly the same way, the pen of divine determining sets up and arranges the 
beings of the earth, especially plants. Divine power creates them on the page of the 
springtime. Then  in order for them to express their beautiful meanings and for their 
forms and identities to pass to the ledgers of the World of the Unseen, for instance the 
World  of  Similitudes,  divine  wisdom  requires  that  the  arrangement  be  changed.  In 
this way, the page of  

 

341

another, future spring may be written and its beings express their meanings too. 

SECOND INDICATION 

Secondly,  and  producing  truths  pertaining  to  the  World  of  the  Unseen  and  the 

weavings of the Preserved Tablet. 

This  section  shows  that  before  departing  from  existence,  everything,  whether 
particular or universal, and especially living beings, produces many truths pertaining 
to  the  Unseen.  So  too  they  leave  behind  them  on  the  tablets  and  notebooks  of  the 
World  of  Similitudes  forms  to  the  number  of  the  stages  of  their  lives.  Their  life 
histories  and  those  of  their  forms  that  are  meaningful  are  inscribed  and  become 
objects of study for spirit beings.  

For example, a flower passes from existence, but together with leaving behind its 
essential  nature  in  its  hundreds  of  seeds,  it  leaves  thousands  of  its  forms  on  small 
Preserved Tablets and in memories, which are small samples of the Preserved Tablets. 
And  throughout  the  stages  of  its  life  it  causes  conscious  beings  to  study  the 
embroideries of the divine names and the dominical glorifications it expresses; then it 
departs. 

Similarly,  the  springtime  is  a  flower  adorned  with  finely  wrought  beings  in  the 
flower-pot of  the  face  of  the  earth;  it  apparently  dies  and  departs  for  non-existence, 
but in its place it leaves behind in existence the truths pertaining to the Unseen it has 
expressed to the number of its seeds, and identities in the World of Similitudes it has 
published to the number of its flowers, and the instances of dominical wisdom it has 
displayed  to  the  number  of  its  beings;  only  then  is  it  hidden  from  us.  Moreover,  it 
makes room for its friends, other springs, to come and perform their duties. That is to 
say,  the  spring  is  divested  of  an  external  existence,  and  in  meaning  is  clothed  in  a 
thousand existences.  

THIRD INDICATION 

panoramas. 

Thirdly,  and  spreading  the  fruits  of  the  hereafter  and  publishing  everlasting 

This section states that the world is a workbench and an arable field raising crops 
suitable for the market of the  hereafter. We  have proved in many of the Words that 
just as jinn and men send their actions to the market of the hereafter, so too the other 
beings in the world perform numerous duties on account of the hereafter and produce 
many crops for it. It may even be said that the earth travels for them, or even that this 
is  its purpose. This dominical ship traverses a twenty-four thousand  year distance  in 
one year, circumscribing the field of the resurrection. 

 

342

For example, the people of Paradise will surely wish to recall their adventures in 
this world and recount them to one another. They will be exceedingly curious to see 
the images and pictures of those adventures, and they will enjoy it immensely if they 
can watch them like watching a cinema screen. Consequently, as the verse,  

[Joyfully] facing each other on thrones [of dignity] (15:47; 37:44)  

indicates,  in  Paradise,  the  realm  of  delight  and  happiness,  worldly  adventures  and 
scenes of worldly happenings will be recalled, amid everlasting panoramas. 

Thus,  the  beautiful  beings  of  this  world  appearing  for  a  moment  then 
disappearing,  and  following  on  one  after  the  other  in  succession,  appear  to  be 
factories and workshops manufacturing the vistas of eternity. For example, in order to 
give fleeting situations a permanence and leave souvenirs for the people of the future, 
the  people  of  present-day  civilization  record  the  images  of  beautiful  or  strange 
happenings  and  present  them  as  gifts  to  the  future  by  means  of  the  cinema  screen; 
they show the past in the present and the future, and include it in them. 

In just the same way, the All-Wise Maker of the beings of spring and this world 
records  the  aims  of  their  brief  lives,  which  look  to  the  World  of  Eternity,  in  that 
world. He records in everlasting scenes in the Eternal Realm the vital duties and the 
divine miracles they have performed throughout the stages of their lives, as required 
by His names of All-Wise, All-Compassionate, and Loving. 

FOURTH INDICATION 

Fourthly,  and  proclaiming  dominical  glorifications  and  making  known  the 

requirements of the divine names. 

This  section  states  that  throughout  the  stages  of  their  lives,  beings  perform 
numerous  varieties  of  dominical  glorifications.  They  also  display  various  situations 
that  the  divine  names  necessitate  and  require.  For  example,  the  name  of  All-
Compassionate  desires  to  be  compassionate.  The  name  of  Provider  necessitates  the 
giving of sustenance. The name of Gracious requires the granting of favours. And so 
on;  all  the  divine  names  require  and  necessitate  something.  Thus,  in  addition  to 
demonstrating  the  requirements  of  the  names  through  their  lives  and  existences,  all 
living  beings  glorify  the  All-Wise  Maker  to  the  number  of  their  members  and 
faculties. 

For example, a man eats delicious fruits which are then dissolved in his stomach 
and apparently destroyed, but they both produce a pleasure and eagerness arising from 
activity in all the cells of his body as well as his  

 

343

mouth and stomach, and comprise very many instances of wisdom like nurturing his 
life and  every  part  of  his body  and  causing  his  life  to  continue.  And  the  food  itself 
rises from vegetable existence to the level of human life; it progresses. 

In  exactly  the  same  way,  when  beings  are  hidden  behind  the  veil  of  death,  in 
addition  to  their  very  many  glorifications  enduring  in  their  places,  they  bequeath  to 
the divine names many of the names’ embroideries and requirements. That is to say, 
they  depart  entrusting  them  to  an  eternal  existence.  If,  then,  when  a  transient  and 
temporary existence departs thousands of existences manifesting a sort of permanence 
remain  in  its place, can  it be said that the thing  is to be pitied, or that it  was  all for 
nothing, or why did that lovable creature depart; can it be complained about? For the 
mercy,  wisdom,  and  love  that  look  to  it  required  and  necessitated  it  to  be  thus. 
Otherwise  thousands  of  benefits  would  have  to  be  abandoned  so  that  a  single  harm 
would  not  come about;  in  which  case  the  harm  would be  a  thousandfold.  That  is  to 
say, the names of All-Compassionate, All-Wise, and Loving One are not opposed to 
death and separation; indeed, they require and necessitate it. 

FIFTH INDICATION  

knowledge. 

Fifthly,  so  that  the  divine  attributes  become  apparent  and  the  aspects  of  divine 

This  section  states  that  on  departing  from  visible  existence,  beings,  and 
particularly  living beings, leave behind them many  enduring things. As described in 
the Second Sign, among the attributes of dominicality (ﬂuûnât-› rubûbiyet) – in a way 
befitting  the  sacredness  and  perfect  self-sufficiency  of  the  Necessarily  Existent 
Essence and in a form worthy of Him – are a boundless love, an infinite compassion, 
an endless pride, and, if the term is permissible, a boundless holy pleasure, a joy, and 
if  the  expression  is  not  mistaken,  an  infinite  sacred  delight,  and  a  transcendent 
happiness; the traces of which are to be observed and seen.  

Yes,  through  change  and  transformation,  decline  and  transience,  beings  are 
driven on at speed within the astonishing activity necessitated by these attributes; they 
are constantly sent from the Manifest World to the World of the Hereafter. Under the 
manifestations of the attributes, creatures are shaken up in a continual flow and flood, 
motion and movement, scattering to the ears of the heedless the lamentations of death 
and  separation,  and  to  the  hearing  of  the  people  of  guidance,  a  clamour  of 
glorification and recital of God’s names. It is by virtue of this mystery that all beings 
depart leaving  

 

344

behind them in existence meanings, qualities, and states which will each be a means 
to the manifestation of the Necessarily Existent One’s eternal attributes. 

Furthermore, beings depart leaving behind them the stages  and states they have 
undergone throughout their lives – a detailed existence which represents their external 
existence  –  on  the  Preserved  Tablet,  and  in  the  Clear  Book  and  Clear  Record,  and 
other spheres of existence like these that pertain to divine knowledge. This means that 
every  transitory  being  abandons  one  existence  and  gains  thousands  of  permanent 
existences.  

For  example,  a  number  of  common  substances  are  thrown  into  a  wondrous 
machine in a factory; they burn up inside it and are apparently destroyed, but in those 
vats valuable chemical substances are precipitated. Also, through its force and steam, 
the factory’s machinery works: in one area of it textiles are woven, in another books 
are printed, while in another sweets and other rare confections are manufactured; and 
so  on;  it  produces  these.  That  is  to  say,  thousands  of  things  come  into  existence 
through the burning of those common substances and their apparent destruction. One 
common existence departs but leaves a legacy of numerous elevated existences. Can 
one  therefore  feel  sorry  for  the  common  substance?  Can  one  complain  about  the 
factory  owner  because  he  did  not  pity  it  and  burnt  it,  destroying  those  affectionate 
substances? 

Similarly,  “And  God’s  is  the  highest  similitude,”(16:60)  as  necessitated  by 
mercy, wisdom, and lovingness, the Wise, Compassionate, and Loving Creator causes 
the  factory  of  the  universe  to  work.  He  makes  all  transient  existences  the  seeds  of 
numerous  perpetual  existences;  He  makes  them  the  means  for  the  fulfilment  of  the 
dominical aims; He makes them manifest the divine attributes; He makes them the ink 
for the pen of divine determining and shuttles for the weaving of divine power; and 
for many elevated aims and favours that we do not yet know, through the activity of 
His power He causes the activity of the universe; He causes particles to spin, beings 
to  travel,  animals  to  flow,  and  the  planets  to  rotate;  He  makes  the  universe  speak, 
causing  it  to  silently  recite  His  verses,  His  signs,  and  to  inscribe  them.  And  of  the 
creatures of the earth – with regard to His dominicality – He makes the air a throne 
for  His  command  and  will;  the  element  of  light  a  throne  for  His  knowledge  and 
wisdom;  water  a  throne  for  His  bounty  and  mercy;  and  earth  a  throne  for  His 
preservation and giving of life; and three of these thrones He rests on the creatures of 
the earth. 

Know  certainly  that  the  shining  truth  demonstrated  in  these  five  Signs  and five 
Indications  is  to  be  seen  through  the  light  of  the  Qur’an  and  may  be  laid  claim  to 
through the strength of belief. Otherwise a terrifying dark 

 

345

ness takes the place of this enduring truth. For the people of misguidance, the world is 
full to overflowing with deaths, separations, and non-existence; for them, the universe 
is a sort of Hell. Everything has only a flash of existence and is surrounded by never-
ending  non-being.  The  past  and  the  future  are  filled  with  the  darkness  of  non-
existence;  they  may  find  a  sad  light  of  existence  only  in  the  fleeting  present. 
However,  through  the  mystery  of  the  Qur’an  and  the  light  of  belief,  a  light  of 
existence becomes apparent which shines from pre-eternity to post-eternity; believers 
are connected with that, and through it secure eternal happiness. 

I n  S h o r t :  In the manner of the poet Niyazi Misrî, we say: 

Till this breath becomes the ocean, 
Till this cage is smashed to fragments, 
Till this voice is silenced, 
I shall call: O Truth! O Existent! O Living One! Most Worthy of Worship! 
O Most Wise! One Sought! Most Compassionate! All-Loving! 

And I call out: 

And believing, I declare: 

There is no god but God, the Sovereign, the Truth, the Evident; Muhammad 
is the Messenger of God, faithful in His promise, Amen. 

Resurrection  after  death  is  true;  Paradise  is  true;  Hell-fire  is  true;  eternal 
happiness  is  true;  God  is  Compassionate,  Wise,  and  Loving;  and  Mercy, 
Wisdom, and Love encompass all things and all their attributes. 
And they shall say: “Praise be to God, who has guided us to this [felicity]; 
never  could  we  have  found  guidance,  had  it  not  been  for  the  guidance  of 
God; indeed,  it  was  the  truth  that the prophets of  our Sustainer  brought to 
us!”(7:43) 
Glory be to the One who has made the garden of the earth the exhibition of 
His  art,  the  gathering  of  His  creatures,  the  place  of  manifestation  of  His 
power, the means of His wisdom, the garden of His mercy, the tillage of His 
Paradise, the place of passage of creatures, through which beings flow, the 
measure  of  artefacts;  adorned  by  animals,  embroidered  with  birds,  made 
fruitful  by  trees,  made  to  bloom  with  flowers;  miracles  of  His  knowledge, 
wonders of His art, gifts of His munificence, proofs of His favour, evidences 
of His unity, subtleties of His wisdom, witnesses to His mercy; the smiling of 
the blossoms with the adornment of fruits, the singing of the birds in the  

 

346

breezes of morning, the pattering of the rain on the cheeks of the flowers; the 
adornment of  the  flowers,  the  embellishment  of  the  fruits  in  these gardens; 
all  mothers,  human  and  animal,  are  tender  towards  their  small  young, 
making known a Loving One, making loved a Merciful One, the compassion 
of a  Kind  One,  the  tenderness of  One  sympathetic  to  man and  jinn, and  to 
spirits, animals, angels, and jinn. 

 

347

The First Addendum 
to the Twenty-Fourth Letter 

In His Name, be He glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Say: No importance would your Sustainer attach to you were it not for your 
supplication.(25:77) 

Listen now to five points concerning this verse. 

First Point 

Supplication is a mighty mystery of worship; indeed, it is as though the spirit of 

worship. As we have mentioned in many places, supplication is of three sorts. 

The First Sort of Supplication: This  is the tongue of latent ability. Through  it 
all  seeds and  grains  supplicate the All-Wise  Creator, saying: “Make us  grow! Make 
our  tiny  truths  sprout  and  transform  us  into  the  mighty  reality  of  a  tree,  so  that  we 
may display the elaborate embroideries of Your names!” 

Another  sort  of  supplication  through  the  tongue  of  latent  ability  is  this:  the 
gathering together of causes is a supplication for the creation of the effect. That is to 
say,  the  causes  take  up  a  position  whereby  they  resemble  a  tongue  of  disposition 
through  which  they  beseech  the  effect  from  the  All-Powerful  One  of  Glory.  For 
example, water, heat, earth, and light take up positions around a seed, and their doing 
this constitutes a tongue of supplication which says: “O Our Creator, make this seed 
into a tree!” For the tree, a wonderful miracle of power, cannot be attributed to those 
unconscious,  lifeless,  simple  substances;  that  would  be  impossible.  This  means  the 
coming together of causes is a sort of supplication. 

The Second Sort of Supplication: This is through the tongue of innate need. It is 
the supplication made by all living creatures to the All-Compassionate Creator to give 
them  the  things  they  need  and  desire,  which  are  beyond  their  power and  will,  from 
unexpected places, at the appropriate  

 

348

time. For an All-Wise and Compassionate One sends them all these things at the right 
time, from places they do not know. They are beyond their reach. That is to say, the 
bestowal is the result of supplication. 

In  Short:  All  that  rises  to  the  divine  court  from  the  universe  is  a  supplication. 

Those things that are causes seek the effects from God. 

The  Third  Sort  of  Supplication:  This  is the  supplication  of  conscious  beings, 

which arises from need. It is of two kinds:   

If it is made at a time of desperate need, or is completely conformable with innate 
need, or if it  is  close to the tongue of latent ability, or is made with the tongue of a 
pure, sincere heart, this supplication is virtually always acceptable. The greater part of 
human progress and most discoveries are the result of this sort of supplication. For the 
things they call the wonders of civilization and the matters and discoveries they take 
pride  in  are  the result  of  what  is  in  effect  supplication.  They  were  asked  for with  a 
sincere  tongue  of  latent  ability  and  so  were  given.  So  long  as  there  is  nothing 
preventing  them  and  they  are  conformable  with  conditions,  supplications  made 
through the tongues of latent ability and innate need are always acceptable. 

The Second Kind: This is the well-known supplication and it too is of two kinds. 
One  is  by  action  and  the  other  by  word.  For  example,  ploughing  is  supplication  by 
action. It is not seeking the sustenance from the earth; the earth is a door to a treasury 
of mercy, and the plough knocks on the earth, the door to divine mercy. 

We shall skip details of the remaining sorts, and explain in the following two or 

three points one or two of the secrets of supplication by word. 

Second Point 

Supplication  has  a  powerful  effect.  It  almost  always  yields  results,  indeed,  its 
results are continuous, especially if it gains universality and is constant. It may even 
be  said  that  supplication was  one  of  the  reasons  for  the  world’s  creation.  That  is  to 
say, the supplications of chiefly mankind, and of them principally the Islamic world, 
and  mainly  the  sublime  supplications  of  Muhammad  the  Arabian  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace)  were  a  cause  of  the  universe’s  creation.  That  is  to  say,  the 
Creator  of  the  World  knew  that  in  the  future  Muhammad  (UWBP)  would  ask  for 
eternal happiness and for a manifestation of the divine names in the name of mankind, 
indeed, on account of all beings, and He accepted that future supplicaton and created 
the universe. 

Since  supplication  possesses  this  great  importance  and  capacity,  is  it  at  all 

possible that the supplications offered all the time for one thousand  

 

349

three  hundred  and  fifty  years  by  three  hundred  million  of  mankind  and  by 
uncountable  numbers  of  blessed  beings  from  among  men,  jinn,  angels,  and  spirit 
beings for the bestowal of suprem divine mercy and eternal happiness on the Person 
of  Muhammad  (UWBP),  and  for  the  accomplishment  of  their  aims  would  not  be 
accepted? Is it in any way possible that their supplications would be rejected? 

Since  all  these  supplications  have  acquired  universality,  extensiveness,  and 
continuousness  to  this  extent  and  have  reached  the  level  of  the  tongues  of  latent 
ability and innate need, for sure, as a result of them, Muhammad the Arabian (UWBP) 
has  achieved  such  a  rank  and  degree  that  if  all  minds  were  to  gather  together  and 
become one mind, it could not completely comprehend it. 

O Muslims! This is the intercessor you shall have on the Day of Resurrection! So 

if you want to attract his intercession, follow his practices (sunna)! 

I f  y o u  a s k : Since he is God’s Beloved, what need does he have of all these 

blessings and supplications? 

T h e  A n s w e r : This Being (UWBP) is concerned with the happiness of all his 
community  and  shares  in  the  good  fortune  of  each  of  its  members.  So  too,  he  is 
disturbed  by  all  their  tribulations.  For  sure,  the  degrees  of  his  own  happiness  and 
perfection are endless, but since he desires ardently the numberless kinds of happiness 
for the numberless members of his community for an unlimited time, and is saddened 
at the  numberless  kinds of their wretchedness,  he is  surely  worthy of and needy  for 
endless blessings and supplications and mercy. 

I f  y o u  a s k : Sometimes supplications are offered for things that are definite; 
for example, the supplications in the prayers offered during lunar and solar eclipses. 
Also, sometimes supplications are made for things that will never come about. What 
does this mean? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  As  is  explained  in  others  of  the  Words,  supplication  is 
worship.  By  means  of  it,  God’s  servant proclaims  his  powerlessness  and  want. The 
apparent  purposes  mark  the  times  of  the  supplication  and  the  supplicatory  worship; 
they  are  not  really  the  purpose.  The  purpose of worship  and  its  benefits  look  to the 
hereafter.  If  its  worldly  aims  are  not  obtained,  it  should  not  be  said  that  the 
supplication was not accepted, but that the time for it has not yet ended. 

Also, is it at all possible that eternal happiness, which all the believers have asked 
for  at  all  times,  continuously,  with  complete  sincerity  and  yearning  and  entreaty, 
should not be given to them, and that the Absolutely  Generous One, the Absolutely 
Compassionate One, who according to the  

 

350

testimony  of  the  universe  possesses  boundless  mercy,  should  not  accept  their 
supplications and that eternal happiness should not exist? 

Third Point 

There are two ways in which voluntary supplication by word is acceptable. It is 

either accepted exactly as desired or what is better is granted.  

For example, someone asks for a son and Almighty God bestows a daughter like 
Mary.  One  should  not  say  that  his  supplication  was  not  accepted,  but  that  it  was 
accepted in a better way. 

Also, sometimes a person makes supplication for his happiness in this world and 
it is accepted for the hereafter. One should not say that his supplication was rejected, 
but  that  it  was  accepted  in  a  better  form.  Similarly,  Almighty  God  is  All-Wise;  we 
seek from Him and He responds to us. But He deals with us in accordance with His 
wisdom. 

A sick person should not cast aspersions on  his doctor’s wisdom. If he  asks for 
honey and the expert doctor gives him quinine, he should not say: “The doctor didn’t 
listen  to  me.”  For  the  doctor  listened  to  his  sighs  and  moans;  he  heard  them  and 
responded to them. He prescribed something better than what was asked for. 

Fourth Point 

The best, finest, sweetest, most immediate fruit and result of supplication is this, 
that the person who offers it knows there is someone who listens to his voice, sends a 
remedy  for  his  ailment,  takes  pity  on  him,  and  whose  hand  of  power  reaches 
everything. He is not alone in this great hostel of the world; there is an All-Generous 
Being who looks after him and makes it friendly. Imagining himself in the presence of 
the One who can bring about all his needs and repulse all his innumerable enemies, he 
feels  a  joy  and  relief;  he  casts  off  his  load,  which  is  as  heavy  as  the  world,  and 
exclaims: “All praise be to God, the Lord and Sustainer of All the Worlds!” 

Fifth Point 

Supplication  is  the  spirit  of  worship  and  results  from  sincere  belief.  For  the 
person  who  makes  supplication  shows  that  there  is  someone  who  rules  the  whole 
universe, saying: “He knows the least significant things about me, can bring about my 
farthest aims; who sees every circumstance of mine, and hears my voice. He hears the 
voices of all beings, and He hears my voice too. He does all these things, so I await 
my smallest needs from Him too. I ask Him for them!”   

See  the  extensive,  sincere  belief  in  God’s  unity  that  supplication  gives,  and  the 

sweetness and purity of the light of belief that it shows!  Under 

 

351

stand the meaning of the verse, 

Say, No importance would your Sustainer attach to you were it not for your 
supplication;(25:77) 

listen to the decree of, 

wanting.”1 

And your Sustainer says: Call on Me; I shall answer you.(40:60) 

As  the  saying  goes:  “If  I  had  not  wanted  to  give,  I  would  not  have  given 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All Wise!(2:32) 
O God, grant blessings to our master Muhammad from pre-eternity to post-
eternity,  to  the  number  of  things  present  in  divine  knowledge,  and  to  his 
Family and Companions, grant them peace; and preserve us from harm, and 
preserve our religion. Amen. And all praise be to God, the Sustainer of All 
the Worlds. 

                                                 
1 See, Abu Nu’aym, Hilyat al-Awliya’, iii, 263. 

 

352

The Second Addendum 
to the Twenty-Fourth Letter 

 [This is about the Ascension of the Prophet Muhammad (UWBP)] 

In His Name! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
For,  indeed,  he  saw  him  at  a  second  descent;  *  Near  the  Lote-tree  of  the 
farthest  limit; *  Near it  is  to  the Garden of Abode. *  Behold,  the  Lote-tree 
was shrouded in mystery unspeakable! * [His] eye did not waver, nor yet did 
it  stray;  *  Truly  did  he  see  some  of  the  most  profound  of  his  Sustainer’s 
signs.(53:13-18) 

[We shall explain in five points, the section on the Ascension in 
the Mevlid of the Prophet (UWBP).1] 

First Point 

Süleyman Efendi, in the Mevlid which he wrote, recounts a sad love story about 
Buraq,  which  was  brought  from  Paradise.  Since  Süleyman  Efendi  was  one  of  the 
saints and the story is based on narrations, it must surely express a truth. 

The  truth  of  the  matter  must  be  this:  the  creatures  of  the  Eternal  Realm  are 
closely  connected  with  the  light  of  God’s  Most  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings and peace). For it is through the light that he brought that Paradise and the 
world of the hereafter will be inhabited by mankind and the jinn. If it had not been for 
him, there would have been no eternal happiness, and mankind and the jinn, who have 
the ability to benefit from all the creatures of Paradise, would not have dwelt there; in 
that sense it would have remained empty, a wasteland.  

As is explained in the Fourth Branch of the Twenty-Fourth Word, a sort  

                                                 
1 A Mevlid is a recitation by special singers of the long poem about the Prophet Muhammad (UWBP) 
written by Süleyman Çelebi, who died in Bursa 780/1378. 

 

353

of  nightingale  has  been  chosen  from  each  of  the  animal  species  to  proclaim  the 
intense  need  of  the  species  –  and  passion  even  –  for  the  caravans  of  plant  species 
which,  proceeding  from  the  treasury  of  mercy,  bear  their  provisions.  The  chief  of 
these are the nightingale and the rose. The songs of these dominical orators, and the 
love-song  of  the  nightingale  for  the  rose,  are  a  welcoming,  an  applause,  glorifying 
God, before the most beautiful of the plants.  

Similarly, Gabriel (Upon whom be peace), one of the angels, served with perfect 
love  Muhammad  the  Arabian  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace),  who  was  the 
reason  for  the  creation  of  the  spheres,  the  cause  of  happiness  in  this  world  and  the 
next,  and  the beloved  of  the  Sustainer  of  All  the  Worlds.  He  thus  demonstrated the 
obedience  and  submission  of  the  angels  to  Adam  (Upon  whom  be  peace)  and  the 
reason for their prostrating before him. Similarly, the people of Paradise – and some 
of  its  animals  even  –  feel  a  connection  with  Muhammad  (UWBP),  and  this  found 
expression in the passionate feelings of Buraq, whom he mounted. 

Second Point 

One  of  the  adventures  during  the  Ascension  concerned  Almighty  God’s 
transcendent  love  for  His  Most  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and 
peace),  which  was  expressed  by  the  phrase:  “I  am  your  lover.”  In  its  common 
meaning,  such  words  are  inappropriate  for  the  Necessarily  Existent  One’s  holiness 
and  His  essential  self-sufficiency.  Süleyman  Efendi’s  Mevlid  has  enjoyed  great 
popularity; it may be understood from this that, as one of the people of sainthood and 
reality, his allusion is correct. Its meaning is this: 

The Necessarily Existent One possesses infinite beauty and perfection, for all the 
varieties of them dispersed through the universe  are the signs and indications of His 
beauty  and  perfection.  Those  who  possess  beauty  and  perfection  clearly  love  them. 
Similarly, the All-Glorious One greatly loves His beauty, and He loves it in a way that 
befits  Himself. Furthermore, He  loves  His names, which are the rays of  His beauty, 
and  since  He  loves  them,  He  surely  loves  His  art,  which  displays  their  beauty.  In 
which case, He also loves His creatures, which are mirrors reflecting His beauty and 
perfection.  Since  He  loves  the  creatures  that  display  them,  He  certainly  loves  the 
creatures’ fine qualities, which point to the beauty and perfection of His names. The 
All-Wise Qur’an alludes to these five sorts of love with its verses. 

Thus, since the Most Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) was 

the most perfect of creatures and the most excellent of beings; 

 

354

And since he displayed and applauded divine art with a clamour of glorification 

and recitation of God’s names; 

and perfection found in the names; 

And  since  he  opened  through  the  tongue  of  the  Qur’an  the  treasuries  of  beauty 

And  since,  through  the  tongue  of  the  Qur’an  he  expounded  brilliantly  and 
compellingly  the  evidences  for  the  Maker’s  perfection  in  the  creational  signs  of  the 
universe; 

And  since  through  his  universal  worship  he  acted  as  a  mirror  to  divine 

dominicality; 

And since through the comprehensiveness of his essential nature he was the most 

perfect locus for the manifestation of all the divine names; 

It surely may be said that since the  All-Beauteous One of Glory loves  His own 
beauty, He loves Muhammad the Arabian (Upon whom be blessings and peace), the 
most  perfectly  conscious  mirror  to  His  beauty.  And  since  He  loves  His  names,  He 
loves  Muhammad  the  Arabian  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace),  who  was  the 
most brilliant mirror to the names, and He loves those who, according to their degree, 
resemble him. 

And  since  He  loves  His  art,  He  certainly  loves  Muhammad  the  Arabian  (Upon 
whom  be  blessings  and  peace),  who  proclaimed  His  art  to  the  universe  in 
reverberating voice, making it ring in the ears of the heavens, and who with a tumult 
of glorification and recitation of the divine praises, brought to ecstasy the land and the 
sea; and He loves too those who follow him. 

And since He loves His artefacts, He loves living beings, the most perfect of His 
artefacts, and intelligent beings, the most perfect of living beings, and human beings, 
the  most  superior of intelligent  beings,  and  He  surely  loves  most  of  all  Muhammad 
the  Arabian  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace), who  as  is  agreed by  all  was  the 
most perfect of human beings. 

And since He loves the moral virtues of His creatures, He loves Muhammad the 
Arabian (Upon whom be blessings and peace), whose moral qualities were at the very 
highest degree, as is agreed unanimously, and He loves too those who, as far as they 
can,  resemble  him.  This  means  that  like  His  mercy,  Almighty  God’s  love 
encompasses the universe. 

Thus, it was because among all those innumerable beloveds, the ultimate degree 
in  every respect  of  the  above-mentioned  five  aspects  was  unique  to  Muhammad the 
Arabian (Upon whom be blessings and peace) that he was  given the  name of God’s 
Beloved. 

This was the reason Süleyman Efendi expressed this highest rank of being God’s 
beloved  with  the  words:  “I  am  your  lover.”  The  expression  is  meant  to  provoke 
thought; it is a distant allusion to this truth. Nevertheless,  

 

355

since it conjures up associations unfitting to the attributes of dominicality, it is best to 
say instead: “I am pleased with you.” 

Third Point 

The adventures of the Ascension cannot express those sacred, transcendent truths 
through allusions that we understand. Its exchanges are like observation posts, means 
to reflective thought, indications of profound and elevated truths, reminders for some 
of the truths of faith, and allusions to inexpressible meanings. They are not adventures 
in the sense that we know. We cannot reach those truths through our imaginations; we 
rather feel a pleasurable excitement in our hearts through our faith, a luminous joy of 
the spirit. For just as Almighty God has no like or match or peer in His essence and 
attributes, so He has no like in  His dominicality  and its qualities. Nor does His  love 
resemble  the  love  of  creatures,  or  His  attributes  resemble  theirs.  So,  holding  such 
expressions to be metaphors, we say this: 

In  a  manner  that  befits  His  necessary  existence  and  holiness  and  in  a  form 
appropriate  to  His  essential  self-sufficiency  and  absolute perfection,  the  Necessarily 
Existent  One  possesses  certain  qualities,  like  love,  which  are  recalled  through  the 
adventures in  the  section  of  the  Mevlid  about  the  Ascension.  The  Thirty-First  Word 
about the Prophet’s Ascension explains and expounds its reality in the context of the 
principles of belief. Deeming that to be sufficient, we leave the present discussion at 
this. 

Fourth Point 

The  words,  “He  saw  Almighty  God  beyond  seventy  thousand  veils”2  express 
distance,  whereas  the  Necessarily  Existent  One  is  free  of  space;  He  is  closer  to 
everything than anything else. What does this mean?  

T h e  A n s w e r : This truth has been explained in detail and with proofs in the 

Thirty-First Word, so here we only say this: 

Almighty God is utterly near to us, but we are utterly distant from Him. The sun 
is near to us through the mirror we are holding, and all transparent objects on the earth 
are a sort of throne for it and a sort of dwelling. If the sun had consciousness, it would 
converse  with  us  by  means  of  our  mirror,  despite  our  being  four  thousand  years 
distant  from  it.  Without  drawing  any  comparisons,  we  can  say  that  the  Pre-Eternal 
Sun is closer to everything than anything else, for He is the Necessarily Existent, he is 
free of space; nothing at all can be a veil to Him. But everything is infinitely distant 
from Him. 

This  is  the  mystery  underlying  the  long  distance  of  the  Ascension  on  the  one 

hand, and the absence of distance expressed by, “And We are closer to  

                                                 
2 See, al-Qastalani, al-Mawahib al-Ladunniya (Sharh: al-Zarghani), vi, 93-100. 

 

356

him than his jugular vein,”(50:16) on the other. God’s Most Noble Messenger (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace) made the Ascension and traversed a vast distance, yet 
he  returned  in  a  single  instant.  The  Ascension  was  his  spiritual  journeying,  an 
expression of his sainthood. For through their spiritual journeying from forty days to 
forty years, the saints advance to the degree of “absolute certainty” among the degrees 
of faith. 

Similarly,  God’s  Most  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be blessings  and peace), 
the  lord  of  all  the  saints,  opened  up  a  mighty  highway  with  his  Ascension,  which 
lasting  forty  minutes  rather  than  forty  years,  was  the  supreme  wonder of  sainthood, 
and which he made not only with his heart and spirit, but also with his body and his 
senses and his  subtle faculties.  He rose to the ultimate degrees of the truths of faith. 
He mounted by the steps of the Ascension to the divine throne, and at the station of 
“the  distance  of  two  bow-lengths”  witnessed  with  his  own  eyes  with  the  vision  of 
certainty  belief  in  God  and  belief  in  the  hereafter,  the  principal  truths  of  faith;  he 
entered  Paradise  and  saw  eternal  happiness.  Then  he  left  open  the  highway  he  had 
disclosed  through  the  door  of  the  Ascension,  and  all  the  saints  of  his  community 
travel  on  their  spiritual  journeyings  under  its  shadow,  with  the  spirit  and  heart,  in 
accordance with their degrees. 

Fifth Point 

The  recitation  of  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  Mevlid  and  its  section  about  his 
Ascension  is a  fine, beneficial custom and admirable Islamic practice. It strengthens 
in  a  pleasant,  shining,  and  agreeable  way  the  fellowship  of  Islamic  social  life;  it  is 
gratifying  and  pleasurable  instruction  in  the  truths  of  faith;  and  is  an  effective  and 
stimulating  way  of  depicting  and  encouraging  the  lights  of  belief,  and  love  of  God, 
and love for the Prophet (UWBP). May Almighty God cause this custom to continue 
to eternity, and may He grant mercy to the writers of Mevlids like Süleyman Efendi, 
and a place in Paradise. Amen. 

Conclusion 

Since  the  Creator  of  the  universe  created  in  every  species  an  outstanding 
individual, including  in  it  all  the  species’  perfections  and  making  it  the  pride of the 
species, He would surely create – through the manifestation of His Greatest Name – 
an  individual  who  within  the  universe  would  be  exceptional  and  perfect.  Just  as 
among His names there is a Greatest Name, so among His creatures there should be a 
pre-eminent individual in whom He would bring together all the perfections dispersed 
through the universe, and through whom He would draw gazes upon Himself.  

 

357

Such an individual would surely be from among living creatures, for among the 
species and realms of beings in the universe, the most perfect are living beings. And 
among  the  animate  species,  the  individual  would  be  an  intelligent  being,  for  among 
living  beings  the  most  perfect  are  those  with  intelligence.  And  certainly,  that 
exceptional individual would be a human being, for among intelligent beings, the one 
capable  of  endless  progress  is  man.  And  among  men,  that  individual  would  be 
Muhammad  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace).  For  no  era  in  history,  from  the 
time of Adam to the present, has produced his like, and cannot and will not produce 
such  a  one.  For  taking  half  the  globe  of the  earth  and  a  fifth  of  mankind  under  his 
spiritual rule, he has perpetuated it magisterially for one thousand three hundred and 
fifty  years,  and  for  all  who  seek  perfection  has  become  a  universal  master  in  every 
sort  of  truth  and  reality.  As  agreed  by  friend  and  foe  alike,  he  possessed  moral 
qualities of the very highest order. At the start of his mission, he challenged the whole 
world  singlehanded.  The  person  who  brought  the Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition, 
which  is  constantly  recited  by  more  than  a  hundred  million  men,  is  surely  that 
excellent individual; it could be no one else. He is both the seed, and the fruit, of this 
world. 

Blessings and peace be upon him to the number of the species of the universe 
and all their beings! 

You  may  understand  then  what  a  pleasurable,  honourable,  luminous,  joyful, 
auspicious,  and  elevated  religious  entertainment  it  is  for  believers  to  listen  to  the 
Mevlid and Ascension of that Being whom they look on as their chief, master, leader, 
and intercessor; that is, to hear about the beginning and end of his progress; that is, to 
learn the story of his spiritual life. 

O our Sustainer! In veneration of Your Most Noble Beloved (Upon whom be 
blessings  and  peace)  and  for  the  sake  of  Your  Greatest  Name,  make  the 
hearts  of  those  who  publish  this  treatise,  and  those  of  their  companions, 
manifest the lights of belief, and make their pens disseminate the mysteries of 
the Qur’an, and set them on the Straight Path! Amen. 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise!(2:32) 

                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i 

The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One! 

 

358

The Twenty-Fifth Letter 
was not written 

*    *    * 

*    *    * 

 

359

The Twenty-Sixth Letter 

First Topic 

In His Name, be He Glorified! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
And if a suggestion from Satan assails your mind, seek refuge with God; for 
He is All-Hearing and All-Knowing.(41:36) 

A Proof of the Qur’an Against Satan and His Party 

This first Topic defeats in argument the Devil, silences the rebellious, and strikes 
them dumb by refuting  in the most clear manner a fearsomely  cunning  stratagem of 
the Devil, which is to be unbiased. It concerns an event part of which I described in 
summary form ten years ago in my work entitled Lemeât. It is as follows: 

Eleven  years  before  this  treatise  was  written,  I  was  listening  in  the  month  of 
Ramadan  to  the  Qur’an  being  recited  in  Bayezid  Mosque  in  Istanbul.  Suddenly, 
although I could see no one, I seemed to hear an  unearthly  voice which captured all 
my attention. I listened with my imagination, and realized that it was saying to me: 

“You consider the Qur’an to be extremely elevated and brilliant. Be unbiased for 
a minute and consider it again. That is, suppose it to be man’s word. I wonder whether 
you would still see the same qualities and beauty in it?” 

In truth, I was deceived by the voice; I thought of the Qur’an as being written by 
man.  Just  as  Bayezid  Mosque  is  plunged  into  darkness  when  the  electricity  is 
switched off, I observed that with that thought the brilliant  

 

360

lights of the Qur’an began to be extinguished. At that point I understood that it was 
the Devil who was speaking to me; he was drawing me towards the  abyss.  I  sought 
help  from  the  Qur’an  and  a  light  was  at  once  imparted  to  my  heart  giving  me  firm 
strength for the defence. I began to argue back at the Devil, saying: 

“O  Satan!  Unbiased  thinking  is  to  take  a  position  between  two  sides.  Whereas 
what both  you and  your disciples from among men call unbiased thinking  is to take 
the  part  of  the  opposing  side;  it  is  not  impartiality,  it  is  temporary  unbelief.  For  to 
consider the Qur’an to be man’s word and to judge it as such is to take the part of the 
opposing side; it is to favour something baseless and invalid. It is not being unbiased, 
it is being biased towards falsehood.” 

The  Devil  replied:  “Well,  in  that  case,  say  it  is  neither  God’s  Word  nor  man’s 

word. Think of it as between the two.” To which I rejoined: 

“That’s not possible either. For if there is a disputed property for which there are 
two claimants, and the claimants are close both to one another and to the property, the 
property will either be given to someone other than them, or will be put somewhere 
accessible so that whoever proves ownership can take it. If the two claimants are far 
apart with one in the east and the other in the west, then according to the rule, it will 
remain with the one who has possession of it since it  is  not possible  for it to be left 
somewhere between them. 

“Thus, the Qur’an is a valuable property, and however distant man’s word is from 
God’s, the two sides in question are that far apart; indeed, they are infinitely far from 
one another. It is not possible for the Qur’an to be left between the two sides, which 
are as far apart as the Pleiades and the ground. For they are opposites  like existence 
and non-existence or the two magnetic poles; there can be no point between them. In 
which case, for the Qur’an, the one who possesses it is God’s side. It will be accepted 
as being in His possession, and the proofs of ownership will be regarded in that way. 
Should the opposing side refute all the arguments proving it to be God’s Word, it may 
claim  ownership  of  it,  otherwise  it  cannot.  God  forbid!  What  hand can  pull out  the 
nails  fastening  that  vast  jewel  to  the  sublime  throne  of  God,  riveted  as  it  is  with 
thousands of certain proofs, and break its supporting pillars, causing it to fall?” 

“Inspite of you, O Satan!, the just and the fair-minded reason in this equitable and 
rightful  manner.  They  increase  their  belief  in  the  Qur’an  through  even  the  slightest 
evidences. While according to the way shown by you and your disciples, if just once 
it is supposed to be man’s word and that mighty jewel fastened to the divine throne is 
cast to the ground, a proof  

 

361

with the strength of all the nails and the firmness of many proofs becomes necessary 
in order to raise  it from the  ground and fasten  it  once more to the throne, and so be 
saved  from  the  darkness  of  unbelief  and  reach  the  lights  of  belief. But because it  is 
extremely difficult to do this, due to your wiles, many people are losing their faith at 
this time by imagining themselves to be making unbiased judgements.” 

The Devil turned and said: “The Qur’an resembles man’s word. It is similar to the 
way men converse. That means it is man’s word. If it were God’s Word, it would be 
appropriate  to  Him  and  altogether  out  of  the  ordinary.  Just  as  His  art  does  not 
resemble man’s art, so His Word should not resemble man’s word.”  

I replied:  “It may be understood as follows: apart from his miracles and special 
attributes,  the  Prophet  Muhammad  (UWBP)  was  a  human  being  in  all  his  actions, 
conduct,  and  behaviour.  He  submitted  to  and  complied  with  the  divine  laws  and 
commands manifested  in  creation.  He  too  suffered  from  the  cold,  experienced  pain, 
and so on. His deeds and attributes were not all  made out of the ordinary  so that  he 
could  be  the  leader  of  his  community  through  his  actions,  its  guide  through  his 
conduct, and instruct it through all his behaviour. If he had been out of the ordinary in 
all his conduct, he could not have been the leader in every respect, the complete guide 
for everyone, the “Mercy to All the Worlds” through all his attributes. 

“In  just  the  same  way,  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  is  the  leader  of  the  aware  and  the 
conscious, the guide of jinn and men, the teacher of those aspiring to perfection, and 
instructor of those seeking reality. It has necessarily, therefore, to be in a form similar 
to human conversation and style. For men and jinn take their supplications from it and 
learn their prayers from it; they express their concerns in its language, and learn from 
it the rules of social behaviour, and so on. Everyone has recourse to it. If it had been 
in  similar  form  to  the  divine  speech  that  the  Prophet  Moses  (Peace  be  upon  him) 
heard on Mount Sinai, human beings could not have borne listening to it and hearing 
it, nor made it a point of reference and recourse. Moses (Peace be upon him), one of 
the five greatest prophets, could only endure to hear a few words. He said: “‘Is Your 
speech thus?’ God replied: ‘I have the power of all tongues.’”1 

Next,  the  Devil  said:  “Many  people  speak  of  matters  similar  to  those  in  the 
Qur’an  in  the  name  of  religion.  Isn’t  it  possible,  therefore,  that  a  human  being  did 
such a thing and made up the Qur’an in the name of religion?” 

                                                 
1 Suyuti, al-Durar al-Manthur, iii, 536. 

 

362

Inspired by the light of the Qur’an, I replied as follows: 
“Firstly: Out of love of religion, someone who is religious may say: ‘The truth is 
this;  in  reality, the  matter  is  thus;  Almighty  God commands  such-and-such.’  But  he 
would not make God speak to suit himself. Trembling at the verse, 

Who,  then  does  more  wrong  than  one  who  utters  a  lie  concerning 
God?(39:32), 

he would not overstep his mark to an infinite degree, imitate God, and speak on His 
behalf. 

“Secondly: It is in no way possible for a human being to be successful in doing 
such  a  thing  on  his  own,  in  fact,  it  is  completely  impossible.  People  who  resemble 
each other may imitate one another, people of the same nation look the same as one 
another, people who are close to one another  in rank or status may  impersonate one 
another  and  temporarily  deceive  people,  but  they  cannot do  so  for  ever.  For  in  any 
event, the falseness and artificiality in their behaviour will show up their imposture to 
the  observant,  and  their  deception  will  not  last.  If  the  person  who  is  attempting  to 
imitate  another  under  false  pretences  is  quite  unlike  them;  for  example,  if  an 
uneducated man wants to imitate in learning a genius like Ibn Sina, or a shepherd to 
assume the position of a king, of course they will not deceive anyone at all, they will 
only  make  fools  of  themselves.  Everything  they  do  will  proclaim,  ‘This  is  an 
impostor.’ 

“Thus,  to  suppose  –  God  forbid!,  a  hundred thousand  times  – the  Qur’an  to  be 
man’s word is utterly impossible; no rational being could accept its possibility; to do 
so  is  a  delirium  like  imagining  to  be  possible  something  that  is  self-evidently 
impossible, like a firefly being regarded by astronomers as a real star for a thousand 
years; or a fly appearing to observers in the form of a peacock for a year; or a bogus 
common private posing as a famous lofty field marshal, taking over his position and 
remaining  in  it  for  a  long  period  without  giving  away  his  deception;  or  like  a 
slandering,  unbelieving  liar  affecting  the  manner  and  position  of  the  most  truthful, 
trustworthy,  upright  believer  throughout  his  life  and  being  completely  unruffled 
before even the most observant while concealing his fraud from them. 

“In just the same way, if the Qur’an is supposed to be man’s word, then it has to 
be supposed, God forbid, that that Perspicuous Book – which is clearly a brilliant star; 
indeed, a sun of perfections perpetually scattering the lights of truth in the heavens of 
the  world  of  Islam  –  is  like  a  firefly,  a  spurious  sham  made  up  by  a  counterfeiting 
human; and those who are closest to it and study it most carefully do not realize this, 
and consider it to be  

 

363

a perpetual, exalted star and source of truth. This is impossible a hundred times over, 
and even if you were to go a hundred times further in your diabolical machinations, O 
Satan, you could not make such an assertion, you could not deceive anyone of sound 
reason! Only sometimes you trick people by making them look from a great distance, 
thus making the star appear as small as a firefly. 

“Thirdly: Also, if the Qur’an  is  imagined to be man’s word, it necessitates that 
the  hidden  reality  of  a  criterion  of  truth  and  falsehood  that  is  miraculous  in  its 
exposition, and through the testimony of its fruits, results, and effects, is gilded with 
the most spiritual and life-giving, the most truthful and happiness-bringing, the most 
comprehensive  and  exalted  qualities  in  the  world  of  humanity,  is,  God  forbid,  the 
fabrication of a single unaided and unlearned man’s mind, and that the great geniuses 
and  brilliant  scholars  who observed him closely  and studied him meticulously  at  no 
time  saw any  trace  of  counterfeit  or pretence  in  him  and  always  found  him  serious, 
genuine, and sincere. 

“This  is  completely  impossible,  an  idea  so  nonsensical  as  to  shame  the  Devil 
himself,  like  dreaming  up  an  utterly  impossible  situation.  For  it  entails supposing  a 
person  who  throughout  his  life  demonstrated  and  taught  trust,  belief,  confidence, 
sincerity,  seriousness,  and  integrity  through  all  his  conduct,  words,  and  actions,  and 
raised  eminently  truthful  and  sincere  followers,  and was  accepted  as possessing  the 
highest,  most  shining  virtues,  to  be  the  most  untrustworthy,  insincere,  and 
unbelieving. For in this question there is no point between the two. 

“If,  to  suppose  the  impossible,  the  Qur’an  were  not  the  Word of  God,  it  would 
fall from  the  divine  throne  to  the  ground;  it  would  not remain  somewhere  between. 
While being the meeting-point of truths, it would become a source of superstition and 
myth.  And  if,  God  forbid,  the  one  who  proclaimed  that  wonderful  decree  was  not 
God’s Messenger, it would necessitate his descending from the highest of the high to 
the  lowest  of  the  low,  and  from  the  degree  of  being  the  source of  accomplishments 
and  perfections  to  the  level  of  being  a  mine  of  trickery  and  intrigue;  he  could  not 
remain between the two. For one who lies and fabricates in  God’s name  falls to the 
very lowest of degrees. 

“It  is  as  impossible  as  permanently  seeing  a  fly  as  a  peacock,  and  all  the  time 
seeing  the  peacocks’s  attributes  in  the  fly.  Only  someone  lacking  all  intelligence 
could imagine it to be possible.  

“Fourthly:  Also,  if  the  Qur’an  is  imagined  to  be  man’s  word,  it  necessitates 
fancying  that  the  Qur’an,  which  is  a  sacred  commander  of  the  community  of 
Muhammad, mankind’s largest and most powerful army, is – God  

 

364

forbid – a powerless, valueless, baseless forgery. Whereas, self-evidently, through its 
powerful laws, sound principles, and penetrating commands, it has equipped that huge 
army  both  materially,  and  morally  and  spiritually,  has  imposed on  it  such  an  order, 
regularity, and discipline that it has conquered both this world and the next, and has 
instructed the minds of people each according to his degree, and trained their hearts, 
conquered  their  spirits,  purified  their  consciences,  and  employed  and  utilized  their 
limbs  and  members.  To  imagine  it  to  be  a  counterfeit  necessitates  accepting  a 
hundredfold impossibility. 

“Such an  impossibility  entails the further total  impossibility of supposing that a 
person  who,  through  his  deliberate  conduct  throughout  his  life  taught  mankind 
Almighty  God’s  laws,  and  through  his  honest  behaviour  instructed  humanity  in  the 
principles  of  truth,  and  through  his  sincere  and  reasonable  words  showed  and 
established the straight way of moderation and happiness, and as all his life testifies, 
felt great fear at divine punishment and knew God better than anyone else and made 
Him  known,  and  in  splendid  fashion  has  for  one  thousand  three  hundred  and  fifty 
years  commanded  a  fifth  of  mankind and  half  the  globe,  and  through  his  renowned 
qualities  is  in  truth  the  pride  of  mankind,  indeed,  of  the  universe,  –  it  entails  the 
impossibility  of  supposing  that,  God  forbid  a  hundred  thousand  times,  he  neither 
feared  God,  nor  knew  Him,  nor  held  back  from  lying,  nor  had  any  self-respect. 
Because  in  this  matter  there  is  no  point  between  the  two.  For  if,  to  suppose  the 
impossible, the Qur’an is not the Word of God, if it falls from the divine throne to the 
ground, it cannot remain somewhere between the two. Indeed, it has to be said to be 
the property of the very worst of liars. And as  for this, O Satan, even  if  you were a 
hundred times more satanic,  you could not deceive any mind that was  not unsound, 
nor persuade any heart that was not corrupted!” 

The  Devil  retorted:  “That’s  what  you  think!  I  have  deceived  most  of  mankind, 

and their foremost thinkers, into denying the Qur’an and Muhammad.”  

I replied: “Firstly: When seen from a great distance, the largest thing appears the 

same as the smallest. A star may even look like a candle. 

“Secondly:  Also,  when  seen  both  as  secondary  and  superficially,  something 

which is completely impossible may appear to be possible. 

“One time when an old man was watching the sky in order to spot the new moon 
of Ramadan, a white hair fell on his eye. Imagining it to be the moon, he announced: 
‘I have seen the new moon!’ Now, it is impossible that the white hair was the moon, 
but  because  his  intention  was  to  spot  the  moon  and  the  hair  was  by  the  way  and 
secondary, he paid it no attention and thought the impossibility was possible. 

 

365

“Thirdly:  Also,  non-acceptance  is  one  thing  and  denial  is  something  quite 
different.  Non-acceptance  is  indifference,  a  closing  of  the  eyes  to  something,  an 
ignorant absence of judgement. It may mask many completely impossible things and 
the mind does not concern itself with them. As for denial, it is not non-acceptance, but 
the acceptance of non-existence; it is a judgement. The mind is compelled to work. So 
a  devil  like  you  takes  hold  of  someone’s  mind  and  leads  it  to  denial.  Showing  the 
false  to  be  truth  and  the  impossible  to  be  possible  through  such  satanic  wiles  as 
heedlessness,  misguidance,  fallacious  reasoning,  obstinacy,  false  arguments,  pride, 
deception,  and  habit,  you  make  those  unfortunate  creatures  in  human  form  swallow 
unbelief and denial, although they comprise innumerable impossibilities. 

“Fourthly: Also, if the Qur’an is supposed to be the word of man, it necessitates 
imagining  to  be  its  opposite  a  book  that  has  self-evidently  guided  the  purified, 
veracious saints and spiritual poles, who shine like stars in the heavens of the world of 
mankind, has continuously instructed all levels of perfected men in truth and justice, 
veracity and fidelity, faith and trustworthiness, and has ensured the happiness of this 
world and the next through the truths of the pillars of faith and the principles of the 
pillars of Islam; a book that through the testimony of its achievements is of necessity 
veracious,  and  pure,  genuine  truth,  and  absolutely  right,  and  most  serious  –  it 
necessitates imagining, God forbid, that it comprises the opposites of these qualities, 
effects,  and  lights,  and  not  only  is  a  collection  of  fabrications  and  lies,  but  also  a 
frenzy of unbelief that would shame even the Sophists and the devils, and cause them 
to tremble. 
“This 

the  further,  most  ugly  and  abhorrent, 
impossibility  that  the  person  who,  according  to  the  testimony  of  the  religion  and 
Shari‘a  of  Islam  that  he  proclaimed,  and  the  extraordinary  fear  of  God  and  pure, 
sincere  worship  that  he  demonstrated  throughout his  life,  and  as  necessitated  by  the 
good moral qualities unanimously witnessed in him, and according to the affirmation 
of  the  people  of  truth  and  perfection  whom  he  raised,  was  the  most  believing,  the 
most  steadfast,  the  most  trustworthy,  and  the  most  truthful,  was  –  God  forbid,  and 
again, God forbid – without faith, that he was most untrustworthy, did not fear God, 
nor  shrink  from  lying.  To  imagine  this  necessitates  imagining  the  most  loathsome 
form  of  impossibility  and  perpetrating  the  most  iniquitous  and  vicious  sort  of 
misguidance. 

impossibility  necessitates 

“In  Short:  As  is  stated  in  the  Eighteenth  Sign  of  the  Nineteenth  Letter,  the 
common  people,  who  gain  an  understanding  of  the  Qur’an’s  miraculous  nature  by 
listening to it, say: ‘If  I were to compare the Qur’an with all the other books I have 
listened to, or with all the other books in the world, it  

 

366

would resemble none of them; it is not the same as them in either kind or degree.’ The 
Qur’an,  then,  is  either  superior  to  all  of  them,  or  inferior  to  all  of  them.  It  is 
impossible that it is inferior, and no enemy or the Devil even could say that. In which 
case, the Qur’an is superior to all other books, and is therefore a miracle. In just the 
same way, we say according to the categorical proof called “residue,” taken from the 
sciences of method and logic: 

“O Satan and O disciples of Satan! The Qur’an is either the Word of God, come 
from the supreme throne of God and His Greatest Name, or, God forbid, and again, 
God forbid, it is a human forgery fabricated on earth by someone without belief who 
neither feared God nor knew Him. In the face of the above proofs, O Satan, you can 
neither say that, nor could you have said it, nor will you be able to say it in the future. 
Therefore, the Qur’an is the Word of the Creator of the universe. Because there is no 
point  between  the  two;  it  is  impossible  and  precluded  that  there  should be.  And  we 
have proved it most clearly and decisively; and you have seen it and heard it. 

“In  the  same  way,  Muhammad  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  is  either 
God’s Messenger and the highest of the prophets and the most superior of creatures, 
or,  God  forbid,  he  has  to be imagined  to be  someone  without belief  who  fell  to the 
lowest of the low because he lied concerning God, and did not know God, and did not 
believe  in  His  punishment.2  And  as  for  this,  O  Devil,  neither  you,  nor  the 
philosophers of Europe or hypocrites of Asia on whom you rely, could say it; neither 
could you say it in the past, nor shall you be able to say it in the future, for there is no 
one in the world who would listen to it and accept it. It is because of this that the most 
corrupting of those philosophers and the most lacking in conscience of the hypocrites, 
even,  admit  that  ‘Muhammad  the  Arabian  (UWBP)  was  very  clever,  and  was  most 
moral and upright.’ 

“Since the matter is limited to these two sides, and the second one is impossible 
and  no  one  at  all  claims  it  to  be  true,  and  since  we  have  proved  with  decisive 
arguments that there is no point between them, for sure and of necessity,  in  spite of 
you  and  your  party,  Muhammad  the  Arabian  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace) 
was  the  Messenger  of  God,  and  the  highest  of  the  prophets  and  the  best  of  all 
creatures.” 

Upon him be blessings and peace to the number of angels and jinn and men. 

                                                 
2 Relying on the fact that the Qur’an mentions the unbelievers’ blasphemies and obscenities, in order to 
refute them, trembling, I too have been compelled to use these expressions, in the form of 
impossibilities, to demonstrate the total impossibility and complete worthlessness of the blasphemous 
ideas of the people of misguidance. 

 

367

A Second, Small Objection 
of Satan 

Not a word does he utter but there is a sentinel by him, ready [to note it]. * 
And the stupor of death will bring the truth [before his eyes]: “This was the 
thing you were trying to escape!” * And the trumpet shall be blown: that will 
be the Day whereof warning [had been given]. * And there will come forth 
every  soul:  with  each  will  be  [an  angel]  to  drive,  and  [an  angel]  to  bear 
witness. * “You were heedless of this; now have We removed your veil. And 
sharp is your sight this Day!” * And his companion will say: “Here is [his 
record]  ready  with  me!”  *  “Throw,  throw  into  Hell  every  contumacious 
rejecter!”(50:18-24) 

One time while reading these verses from Sura Qaf, the Devil said to me: “You 
consider  the  principal  aspects  of  the  Qur’an’s  eloquence  to  lie  in  its  clarity  and 
fluency  of  style,  but  in  these  verses  it  jumps  from  one  subject  to  another.  It  jumps 
from death agonies to the resurrection of the dead, from the blowing of the trumpet to 
the  Last  Judgement,  and  from  that  to  the  entry  into  Hell  of  the  unbelievers.  What 
fluency of style can there be with this extraordinary switching about? In most places 
in the Qur’an, it brings together subjects like this that bear little relation to each other. 
Where is its eloquence and smoothness with such discontinuity?” 

I answered as follows: 
After  its  eloquence,  one  of  the  chief  elements  of  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous 
Exposition’s  inimitability is its conciseness.  Conciseness  is one of the  strongest and 
most  important  elements  of  the  Qur’an’s  miraculousness.  The  instances  of  it  are  so 
numerous and beautiful that exacting scholars are left in wonder at it. For example: 

Then  the  word  went  forth:  “O  earth!  swallow  up  your  water,  and  O  sky! 
withhold [your rain]!” And the water abated, and the matter was ended. The 
ark rested on Mount Judi, and the word went forth: “Away with those who 
do wrong!”(11:44) 

It describes the Great Flood and its consequences so concisely and miraculously in a 
few short sentences that it has caused many scholars of rhetoric  

 

368

to prostrate before its eloquence. And, for example: 

The Thamud rejected [their prophet] through their inordinate wrongdoing. * 
Behold, the most wicked man among them was deputed [for impiety]. * But 
the Apostle of God said to them: “It is a she-camel of God. And [bar her not 
from] having her drink!” * Then they rejected him, and they hamstrung her. 
So their  Lord, on account of their  crime, obliterated their  traces and  made 
them  equal  [in  destruction, high  and  low]!  *  And  for Him  is  no  fear of  its 
consequences.(91:11-15) 

In these  few  short sentences, with a miraculousness within the conciseness, fluency, 
and clarity, and in a way that does not spoil the understanding, the Qur’an relates the 
strange, momentous events involving the Thamud people and their consequences, and 
the Thamud’s calamitous end. And for example: 

And  remember  Zun-Nun,  when he departed  in  wrath: he  imagined  that  We 
had no power over him. But he cried through the depths of darkness: “There 
is  no  god  but  You;  glory  be  unto  You;  I  was  indeed  among  the 
wrongdoers.”(21:87) 

Here,  many  sentences  have  been  “rolled  up”  between  the  words  “that  We  had  no 
power  over  him”  and  “but  he  cried  out  in  the  depths  of  the  darkness,”  but  these 
omitted sentences neither spoil the understanding, nor mar the fluency of the style. It 
mentions the chief elements of the story of Jonah (Upon whom be peace), and refers 
the rest to the intelligence. 

And for example, in Sura Yusuf, the seven or eight sentences between the words 
“Send me” and “Joseph, O man of truth!”(12:45-6) have been skipped concisely,  yet 
it neither impairs the understanding, nor mars the smoothness of the style. There are a 
great  many  instances  of  this  sort  of miraculous  conciseness  in the  Qur’an,  and  they 
are very beautiful indeed. 

However, the conciseness of the verses from Sura Qaf are particularly wonderful 
and  miraculous.  For  they  each  point  out  the  truly  dreadful  future of  the  unbelievers 
when  each  endless  day  will  last  fifty  thousand  years,  and  the  dire  things  that  will 
happen  to  them  in  the  awesome  revolutions  of  the  future.  It  flashes  them  over  the 
mind  like  lightning,  depicting  that  long,  long  period of  time  to  the mind’s  eye  as  a 
single present page. Referring the events that are not mentioned to the imagination, it 
evokes them with truly elevated fluency and smoothness of style. 

When  the  Qur’an  is  read,  listen  to  it  with  attention,  and  hold  your  peace: 
that you may receive mercy.(7:204) 

 

369

And now if you have anything to say, O Satan, say it! 
Satan replied: “I cannot oppose what  you say,  nor defend myself. But there are 
many foolish people who listen to me; and many devils in human form who assist me; 
and many pharaohs among philosophers who learn things from me which flatter their 
egos, and prevent the publication of works like yours. Therefore I shall not lay down 
my arms before you!” 

 

370

Second Topic 

 [This Topic was written in response to the wonder expressed by those 
who serve me permanently at the surprising contradictions they see in 
my conduct. It is also intended to rectify the excessively good opinions 
of me of two of my students.] 

I see that some of the perfections which properly pertain to the truths of the All-
Wise Qur’an are attributed to the instruments who proclaim those truths. And this is 
wrong.  For  the  sacredness  of  the  source  demonstrates  effects  as  powerful  as  many 
proofs; it is through these that it makes everyone accept its injunctions. Whenever the 
herald  or  deputy  obscures  it,  that  is,  whenever  attention  is  turned  to  the  herald,  the 
sacredness loses its effectiveness. It is because of this that I shall explain a truth to my 
brothers who show me greater regard than is my due. It is as follows: 

One  person  may  have  numerous  personalities,  all  of  which  display  different 
qualities. For example, when a high official  is  in his office, his position  necessitates 
dignity and requires a stance that will preserve its loftiness. If he is humble before his 
visitors, it will be lowering and will debase the position. But when in his own house, 
his position requires – contrary to his official position – that he should be as modest 
as he can. If he stands on his dignity, it will be arrogant. And so on. That is to say, a 
person assumes a personality when performing his duty or work that in many respects 
contradicts his true personality. If such a person is truly worthy of his duty and truly 
capable of it, the two personalities are close to each other. But if he lacks the capacity; 
if,  for  example,  a  common  soldier  is  put  in  the  position  of a  field marshal,  the  two 
personalities  are  far  apart;  the  individual,  lowly,  inferior  qualities  of  the  soldier  are 
incompatible with the elevated, superior character demanded by the position of field 
marshal. 

Thus,  this  wretched  brother  of  yours  has  three  personalities,  which  are  very 

distant from each other, truly very distant. 

T h e  F i r s t :  In so far as I am a herald of the elevated treasury of the All-Wise 
Qur’an,  I  have  a  temporary  personality  that  pertains  solely  to  the  Qur’an.  The 
extremely exalted character demanded by this position is not mine;  I do not possess 
such a character. It rather consists of the qualities  

 

371

necessitated by the position and the duty. Any qualities this sort that you see in me are 
not mine, so do not suppose I possess them; they belong to the position. 

T  h  e    S  e  c  o  n  d    P  e  r  s  o  n  a  l  i  t  y  :  Through  Almighty  God’s  grace,  a 
personality  is  given me at the time of worship when  I am turned towards the divine 
court;  it  displays  certain  marks.  These  arise  from  knowing  one’s  faults,  realizing 
one’s  want  and  impotence,  and  seeking  refuge  in  utter  humility  at  the  divine  court, 
which are the basis and meaning of worship. Through this personality, I know myself 
to  be  more  wretched,  powerless,  wanting,  and  faulty  than  everyone.  If  the  whole 
world were to praise and applaud me, it could not make me believe that I am good or 
possess perfection of any sort. 

T h e  T h i r d : I have my true personality, that is, the faulty personality of the 
Old Said, that is, certain veins of character inherited from the Old Said. Sometimes it 
inclines to hypocrisy and desires rank and position. Also, because I do not come from 
a noble family, inferior qualities are to be observed, like my being frugal to the point 
of miserliness. 

My  brothers!  I  am  not  going  to  describe  the  many  secret  faults  and  ills  of  this 

personality, lest I chase you away altogether. 

My  brothers,  since  I  am  not  someone  capable  and  of  high  position,  this 
personality of mine  is  very  far from the character demanded by the duties of  herald 
and of worship; it does not show their traits. Also, in accordance with the rule, “No 
ability  is  needed  to  receive  God’s  gifts,”  Almighty  God  has  compassionately 
demonstrated His power in me so that He employs my personality, which is like that 
of  the  lowest  common  soldier,  in  serving  the  mysteries  of  the  Qur’an,  which 
resembles the highest position of field marshal. Thanks be to God a hundred thousand 
times! The soul is baser than everything, and the duty higher! 

All praise be to God, this is a bounty from my Lord! 

 

372

Third Topic 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
O mankind! We created you from a single [pair] of a male and a female, and 
made you into nations and tribes, that you may know each other.(49:13) 

That is, I created you as peoples, nations, and tribes, so that you might know one 
another and the relations between you in social life, and assist one another; not so that 
you  would  regard  each  other  as  strangers,  refuse  to  acknowledge  one  another,  and 
nurture hostility and enmity. 

Since the elevated truth stated by the above verse concerns the life of society, I 
have  been  compelled  to  write  it  in  the  tongue,  not  of  the  New  Said,  who  wants  to 
withdraw  from  society,  but  of  the  Old  Said,  who  was  involved  in  the  social  life  of 
Islam.  It  is  written  intending  to  serve  the  Qur’an  of  Mighty  Stature  and  to  shield it 
against unjust attacks. 

First Matter  

Second Matter 

In explanation of the principle of mutual acquaintance and assistance alluded to 
by the above verse, we say this: an army is divided into divisions, the divisions into 
regiments,  the  regiments  into  battalions,  and  companies,  and  squads,  so  that  all  the 
soldiers  may  know  their  many  different  connections  and  related duties. In  this  way, 
they  all  will  perform  properly  a  general  duty  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of 
mutual assistance, and the collectivity they  form will be safe from the attacks of the 
enemy. The army is not arranged thus to be divided and split up, with one company 
competing  with  another,  one  battalion  being  hostile  to  another,  and  one  division 
acting in opposition to another. 

Similarly, Islamic society as a whole is a huge army that is divided into tribes and 
groups. Nevertheless, it has unity in numerous respects: its groups’ Creator is one and 
the same, their Provider is one and the same, their Prophet is one and the same, their 
qibla is one and the same, their Book is one and the same, their country is one and the 
same; a thousand things are one and the same. 

 

373

All these things being one and the same necessitates brotherhood, love, and unity. 
That  is  to  say,  being  divided  into  groups  and  tribes  should  lead  to  mutual 
acquaintance and mutual assistance, not to antipathy and mutual hostility. 

Third Matter  

The idea of nationalism has greatly advanced this century. The cunning European 
tyrants  in  particular  awaken  this  among  Muslims  in  negative  fashion  so  they  may 
divide them up and devour them. 

Furthermore, in the idea of nationalism is a thrill of the soul, a heedless pleasure, 
an  inauspicious  power.  For  this  reason  people  involved  in  social  life  at  this  time 
cannot be  told to  give  it  up.  However,  nationalism  is  of  two  kinds:  one  is  negative, 
inauspicious,  and  harmful;  it  is  nourished  by  devouring  others,  persists  through 
hostility  to  others,  and  is  aware  of  what  it  is  doing.  It  is  the  cause  of  enmity  and 
disturbance.  This  is  the  reason  the  Hadith  states  that  Islam  has  abrogated  what 
preceded it and put an end to the tribalism of Ignorance.1 And the Qur’an decrees: 

While  the  unbelievers  got  up  in  their  hearts,  heat  and  cant  –  the  heat  and 
cant of Ignorance – God sent down His tranquillity to His Messenger and to 
the  believers,  and  made  them  stick  close  to  the  command  of  self-restraint; 
and  well  were  they  entitled  to  it  and  worthy  of  it.  And  God  has  full 
knowledge of all things.(48:26) 

The  above  Hadith  and  verse  reject  in  definite  terms  negative  nationalism  and 
racialism. For positive, sacred Islamic nationhood leaves no need for them. 

What  race  has  three  hundred  and  fifty  million  members?  Which  racialism  can 
gain for those who subscribe to it so many brothers – and eternal brothers at that – in 
place of Islam? Negative nationalism has caused untold harm in history. 

I  n    S  h  o  r  t  :    The  Umayyads  combined  some  nationalistic  ideas  with  their 
politics, and vexed the World of Islam. They also brought down many calamities on 
themselves.  Also,  the  European  nations  have  promoted  the  idea  of  racialism 
enormously this century; the ghastly events of the Great War demonstrated just how 
harmful negative nationalism is, in addition to the perpetual, ill-omened enmity of the 
French  and  Germans.  And  with  us,  in  the  Second  Constitutional  Period,  –  like  the 
myriad tongues at the destruction of the Tower of Babel, known as the “ramification 
of peoples,”  

                                                 
1 See, Bukhari, Ahkam, 4; ‘Imara, 36, 37; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 5; Tirmidhi, Jihad, 28; ‘Ilm, 16; Nasa’i, 
Bay’a, 26; Ibn Maja, Jihad, 39; Musnad, iv, 69, 70, 199, 204, 205; v, 381; vi, 402, 403. 

 

374

and  their  resulting  dispersal  –  various  refugee  societies  called  “clubs”  were  formed, 
chiefly  by  the  Armenians  and  Greeks,  because  of  their  negative,  nationalistic  ideas, 
and  these  were  the  cause  of division.  From  that time  to  now,  the  condition  of  those 
devoured by the Europeans due to those clubs, and of those made wretched by them, 
has again demonstrated the harm of negative nationalism. 

As for the present, when the peoples and tribes of Islam are most in need of one 
another,  and  each  is  more oppressed and  more poverty-stricken  than  the  others,  and 
they are crushed beneath European domination, to regard one another as strangers due 
to the idea of nationalism and look on each other as enemies, is such a calamity it is 
indescribable. It is quite simply a lunacy like turning one’s back on dreadful serpents 
so as to avoid being bitten by a mosquito and struggling with the mosquito – due to 
the  idea of nationalism. To attach no importance to the European nations, which are 
like huge dragons, at a time when with their insatiable greed their grasping hands are 
outstretched,  indeed,  to  in  effect  help  them  and  to  nurture  enmity  against  fellow-
citizens  in  the  eastern  provinces  or  brother  Muslims  to  the  south,  and  to  take  up 
positions opposed to them, is extremely detrimental and dangerous. In any event there 
are  no  enemies  among  the  people  to the  south  that  they  should  form a  front  against 
them.  The  Qur’an’s  light  comes  from  the  south;  it  is  where  the  light of  Islam  came 
from. It is present among us and is found everywhere. So to be hostile towards those 
fellow Muslims is indirectly harmful to Islam and the Qur’an. And hostility towards 
Islam  and the Qur’an  is  hostility of a sort towards the  lives  in this world and  in the 
next of all those fellow-citizens. To destroy the foundations of their two lives while 
claiming  to  serve  their  social  life  in  the  name  of  patriotism,  is  not  patriotism  but 
stupidity! 

Fourth Matter  

Positive  nationalism arises  from  an  inner  need  of  social  life  and  is  the  cause  of 
mutual assistance and solidarity. It gives rise to a beneficial strength, and is a way of 
reinforcing Islamic brotherhood. 

The idea of positive nationalism should serve Islam and be its citadel and armour; 
it  should  not  take  its  place.  For  within  the  brotherhood  of  Islam  is  a  hundredfold 
brotherhood  that  persists  in  the  Intermediate  Realm  and  World  of  Eternity.  So 
whatever its extent,  national brotherhood may be an element of  it. But to plant  it  in 
place of Islamic brotherhood is a foolish crime like replacing the treasure of diamonds 
within the citadel with the citadel’s stones, and throwing the diamonds away. 

O sons of this land, who are the people of the Qur’an! Challenging the  

 

375

whole  world,  you  have  proclaimed  the  Qur’an  as  its  standard-bearers,  not  for  six 
hundred  years,  but  for  a  thousand  years  since  the  time  of  the  ‘Abbasids.  You  have 
made your nationhood a citadel to the Qur’an and Islam. You have silenced the whole 
world and repulsed awesome attacks. You have confirmed the verse: 

Soon  God  will  produce a people  whom  He  will  love as  they  will  love  Him, 
lowly with the believers, mighty against the rejecters, fighting in the way of 
God.(5:54) 

Now  you  must  refrain  from  succumbing  to  the  stratagems  of  Europe  and  the 
dissemblers  who  imitate  them,  thus  corroborating  the  passage  above;  you  must  be 
frightened of doing such a thing! 

A  Noteworthy  Situation:  The  Turks  are  the  most  numerous  of  the  Islamic 
peoples, and wherever they are found, they are Muslims. They have not divided into 
Muslims  and  non-Muslims  like  other  peoples.  Wherever  there  are  Turks,  they  are 
Muslims.  Turks  who  have  abandoned  Islam  or  who  are  not  Muslims  are  no  longer 
Turkish, like the Hungarians. But even small races consist of both Muslims and non-
Muslims. 

O my Turkish brother! You watch out in particular! Your nationhood has  fused 
with  Islam  and  may  not  be  separated  from  it.  If  you  do  separate  them,  you  will  be 
finished!  All  your  glorious  deeds  of  the  past  are  recorded  in  the  book  of  Islam’s 
deeds, and cannot be effaced from the face of the earth by any power. So don’t  you 
efface them from your heart at the evil suggestions and devices of Satan! 

Fifth Matter 

The  peoples  awakening  in  Asia  are  embracing  the  idea  of  nationalism  and 
imitating  Europe precisely  in  every  respect,  and on  the  way  are  sacrificing  many  of 
the  things  they  hold  sacred.  However,  every  nation  requires  a  dress  suitable  to  its 
particular stature. Even if the material is the same [for all nations], the styles have to 
be different. A woman cannot be dressed in a gendarme’s uniform, nor can an elderly 
hoja be clothed in a tango-dancer’s outfit. Moreover, blind imitation very often makes 
people into laughing-stocks. This is so for the following reasons: 

F i r s t l y : If Europe is a shop, a barracks, Asia is an arable field and a mosque. 
A shopkeeper can go to the ball, but a peasant cannot. The situation of a barracks and 
that of a mosque cannot be the same. 

Moreover, the appearance of most of the prophets in Asia, and the emergence of 
the majority of philosophers in Europe is a  sign, an  indication, of pre-eternal divine 
determining that what will arouse the Asian peoples and  

 

376

cause them to progress and to govern, are religion and the heart. As for philosophy, it 
should assist religion and the heart, not take its place. 

S  e  c  o  n  d  l  y  :  It  is  a  grievous  error  to  compare  the  religions  of  Islam  and 
Christianity and to be indifferent towards religion like Europe. Firstly, Europe has its 
religion. The fact that such European leaders as Wilson, Lloyd George, and Venizelos 
were as bigoted in their religion as priests, testifies that Europe has its religion, and is 
even bigoted in one respect. 

T  h  i  r  d  l  y  :  To  compare  Islam  with  Christianity  is  a  false  comparison  and 
wrong.  For  when  it  was  bigoted  in  its religion,  Europe was  not  civilized;  it  became 
civilized on giving up its bigotry.  

Furthermore,  religion  caused  three  hundred  years  of  war  between  them.  And 
since it was the means of despotic tyrants crushing the common people, the poor, and 
thinkers  who  were  in  their  power,  they  all  felt  a  temporary  disgust  at  religion. 
However, in Islam, history testifies that apart from one occasion, religion has not been 
the cause of internal war.  

Also, whenever the people of Islam have adhered in earnest to their religion, they 
have  advanced proportionately, achieving significant progress. Witness to this is the 
greatest  master  of Europe,  the  Islamic  state  of  Andalusia. But  whenever  the  Islamic 
community has been slack in religion, it has sunk into wretchedness, and declined. 

Furthermore,  Islam  has  protected  the  poor  and  the  common  people  with 
compassionate measures such as enjoining the payment of zakat and prohibiting usury 
and interest. And in accordance with phrases like, “So will they not think,”(36:68) * 
“So will they not reason,”(6:50) * “So will they not ponder on it,”(4:82) it has called 
on  the  intelligence  and  encouraged  reason  and  knowledge  and  protected  scholars. 
Islam has therefore always been the stronghold and place of recourse of the poor and 
the  people  of  learning.  They  have  no  reason  to  be  vexed  at  Islam.  The  underlying 
reason Islam differs in various respects from Christianity and other religions is this: 

The basis of Islam  is the pure affirmation of divine unity; it attributes no actual 
effect to causes and intermediaries, and affords them  no value in respect of creation 
and position. Christianity, however, since it has accepted the idea of Jesus being the 
Son of God, it gives some value to causes and intermediaries; it cannot break egotism. 
It quite simply  ascribes a manifestation of divine dominicality to its saints and great 
ones, thus confirming the verse: 

They take their priests and their anchorites to be their lords in derogation of 
God.(9:31) 

It is because of this that, together with maintaining their pride and egotism,  

 

377

those Christians who occupy the highest worldly ranks are religious and bigoted, like 
the  former  American  president,  Wilson.  In  Islam,  the  religion  of  pure  divine  unity, 
those holding the highest worldly positions either give up their egotism and pride, or 
they  give up their religion to an extent. For this reason, some are neglectful or even 
irreligious. 

Sixth Matter  

racialism we say this: 

To  those  people  who  go  to  excess  in  the  idea  of  negative  nationalism  and 

F i r s t l y : The face of the world and especially this country of ours has since 
ancient times seen numerous migrations and changes of population. In addition, when 
the centre of Islamic rule was established here other peoples were drawn to it and they 
settled here. Consequently, only when the Preserved Tablet is revealed will the races 
truly be distinguished from each other. To construct movements and patriotism on the 
idea of true race is both meaningless and extremely harmful. It is for this reason that 
one of the nationalist leaders and racialists, who was very neglectful in religion, was 
compelled  to  say:  “If  language  and  religion  are  the  same,  the  nation  is  the  same.” 
Since that is so, relations of language, religion, and country should be considered, not 
true race. If the three are the same, the nation will certainly be strong. And if one is 
absent, there will still be nationhood.  

S  e  c  o  n  d  l  y  :  I  shall  describe  by  way  of  example,  two  of  the  hundreds  of 
advantages the sacred nationhood of Islam has gained for the social life of the sons of 
this land: 

The  First:  What  enabled  this  Islamic  state,  while  numbering  only  twenty  or 
thirty  million, to  preserve  its  life  and  existence  in  the  face  of  all  the  large  states  of 
Europe  was  the  following  idea  held by  its army,  which  was born of  the  light  of the 
Qur’an: “If I die, I shall be a martyr; and if I kill, I shall be a ghazi.” They met death 
eagerly  and  with  longing,  laughing  in  its  face.  They  always  made  Europe  tremble. 
What in the world is there that will give rise to such elevated self-sacrifice in the spirit 
of  a  simple-hearted  soldier?  What  patriotism  can  be  instilled  in  its  place?  What  can 
make him willingly sacrifice his life and all his world? 

The Second: Whenever the dragons (large states) of Europe have dealt a blow at 
this Islamic state, they have caused three hundred and fifty million Muslims to weep 
and cry out. So in order not to make them do that, those colonialists drew back their 
hands;  they  lowered  them,  even  while  raising  them  to  strike.  What  power  can  be 
established in place of this constant moral support, which can be in no way belittled? 
Let  them  show  it!  No,  that  huge  moral  strength  must  not  be  offended  by  negative 
nationalism and independent patriotism. 

 

378

Seventh Matter  

We  say  to  those  who  exhibit  excessive  patriotism  and  negative  nationalism:  if 
you truly love this nation and feel pity for it, be patriotic in such a way that your pity 
is  directed  towards  the  majority  of  its  people.  For  to  serve  the  temporary  heedless 
social life of the minority, who are in no need of pity, in a way that is the reverse of 
pity  for  the  majority,  is  not  patriotism.  Patriotic  works  performed  out  of  negative 
racialism may be temporarily beneficial for two people out of eight. They receive the 
kindness  arising  from  that  patriotism,  although  they  do  not  deserve  it.  But  the 
remaining six are either elderly, or sick, or afflicted with tribulations, or are children, 
or  weak,  or pious  people  turned  earnestly  toward  the  hereafter;  these  people  want  a 
light, a solace, compassion, in the face of the  Intermediate Realm and the  hereafter, 
with the life of which they are concerned rather than worldly life; they are in need of 
helping hands that are blessed and patriotic. What patriotism could permit their light 
to  be  extinguished,  their  solace  to  be  destroyed?  Alas!  Where  is  that  pity  for  the 
nation, that self-sacrifice? 

We must  never  lose  hope in divine mercy. For Almighty God will  not cause to 
perish through temporary set-backs the magnificent army  and mighty community of 
the people of this land, which He employed for a thousand years in the service of the 
Qur’an, appointing them its standard-bearer. He will once again kindle that light and 
cause them to continue their duty, God willing! 

 

379

Fourth Topic 

 [NOTE: The ten Matters of this Fourth Topic are unconnected, in the 
same  way  that  the  four  Topics  of  this  Twenty-Sixth  Letter  are 
unconnected.  So  no  connection  should  be  sought.  They  were  written 
exactly as they occurred to  me. This is part of a letter to an important 
student  of  mine,  consisting  of  the  answers  to  five  or  six  of  his 
questions.] 

The First 

S e c o n d l y : In your letter you mention that explanations and interpretations of 
“Lord  and  Sustainer  of  All  the  Worlds,”(1:2)  state  that  there  are  eighteen  thousand 
worlds,1 and you ask the wisdom in this number. 

My  brother,  at  the  moment  I  do  not  know  the  wisdom  in  it,  but  I  can  say  this 
much: the phrases of the Wise Qur’an are not restricted to a single meaning; for since 
the  Qur’an  addresses  all  the  levels  of  mankind,  its  phrases  are  like  universals  or 
wholes that comprise meanings for each level. The meanings that are expounded are 
like parts of the general law. Every Qur’anic commentator, every adept, mentions one 
part of  the whole.  Basing  it  on  either  his  illumination,  or  his  proofs, or  his way,  he 
prefers  one  meaning.  Thus,  in  this  verse too,  one  group disclosed  a  meaning  which 
corresponded to that number.  
For example, the verses, 

He has let free the two bodies of flowing water, meeting together; * Between 
them is a barrier which they do not transgress,(55:19-20) 

which  the  people  of  sainthood  hold  to  be  significant  and  recite  constantly  in  their 
invocations, are parts with meanings ranging from the sea of dominicality and sea of 
worship  in the  spheres  of  necessity  and contingency  respectively,  to  the  seas  of  the 
World of the Unseen and the Manifest World, and to the oceans of the  north, south, 
east, and west, and to the Adriatic and the Persian Gulf, the Mediterranean, the  Red 
Sea, and the Suez  

                                                 
1 Tabari, Jami’ al-Bayan, i, 63. 

 

380

Canal,  and  to  the  freshwater  and  salt  lakes,  the  various  fresh-water  lakes  under  the 
soil  layer  and  the  salt  lakes  over  it  and  contiguous  with  it,  and  to  the  small  lakes 
called  the  great  rivers,  such  as  the  Nile,  the Tigris, and  the  Euphrates,  and  the salty 
seas into which they flow. Any of these may be intended or meant, and may be their 
literal and metaphorical meanings. 

In  the  same  way,  “All  praise  be  to  God,  the  Sustainer  of  All  the  Worlds” 
encompasses  numerous  truths.  The  people  of  illumination  and  of  reality  interpret 
them differently according to the meanings they uncover. 

Personally, I think that the  heavens consist of thousands of worlds; some of the 
stars  may  each  be  worlds.  On the  earth  too,  every  sort  of  creature  is  a  world.  Each 
human  being  is  a  small  world.  As  for  the  term,  “Sustainer  of  All  the  Worlds,”  it 
means    that  every  world  is  administered,  sustained,  and  governed  directly  through 
Almighty God’s dominicality (rubûbiyet). 

T  h  i  r  d  l  y  :    God’s  Most  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and 
peace)  said:  “When  God  wishes  a  people  well,  he  causes  them  to  see  their  own 
faults.”2 And in the All-Wise Qur’an, Joseph (Upon whom be peace) said: 

“Nor  do  I  absolve  my  own  self  [of  blame];  the  [human]  soul  is  certainly 
prone to evil.”(12:53) 

Yes,  the  person  who  is  fond  of  himself  and  relies  on  himself  is  unfortunate,  while 
someone who sees his own faults is  fortunate. So  you are fortunate! Nevertheless, it 
sometimes  happens  that  the  evil-commanding  soul  is  transformed  into  the  blaming 
soul  or  the  tranquil  soul,  and  that  it  hands  over  its  weapons  and  equipment  to  the 
nerves. Then the nerves and veins of temperament perform its function till the end of 
life.  Although  the  person’s  evil-commanding  soul  died  long  beforehand,  his  nerves 
are still apparent. Many great saints and holy men have complained about their evil-
commanding  souls  although  their  souls  were  tranquil.  They  have  lamented  over 
sicknesses  of  the  heart  although  their  hearts  were  completely  sound  and  illumined. 
But what afflicted these persons was not their evil-commanding souls, but the soul’s 
functions  that  had  been  handed over  to  their  nerves.  Their  ailments  were  not  of the 
heart, but of the  imagination. My brother! God willing, what  is  attacking  you is  not 
your  soul  and  a  sickness  of  the  heart,  but  the  state  which,  as  we  said, by  reason  of 
human nature and to perpetuate striving, has been transferred to the nerves and results 
in constant progress. 

                                                 
2 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 8. 

 

381

Second Matter 

Explanations of the three questions asked by the former teacher (hoja) are to be 
found in various parts of the Risale-i Nur. For now we shall just make brief allusion to 
them. 

H i s  F i r s t  Q u e s t i o n : Muhyi’l-Din al-‘Arabi said in his letter to Fakhr 
al-Din  Razi: “To  know  God  is  different  to  knowing  that  He  exists.”  What  does  this 
mean and what did he intend by saying it? 

Firstly: In the introduction to the Twenty-Second Word, which you read to him, 
the comparison and example  showing the difference between the true affirmation of 
divine  unity  and  its  superficial  affirmation  point  to  what  was  intended.  While  the 
Second and Third Stopping-Places of the Thirty-Second Word and its Aims, elucidate 
it. 

And secondly: Muhyi’l-Din al-‘Arabi said that to Fakhr al-Din Razi, who was a 
leading authority on theology, because the explications of the tenets of belief and the 
existence  of  the  Necessary  Existent  and  divine  unity  offered  by  the  authoritative 
scholars of the principles of religion and theology were insufficient in his view. 

Yes, the knowledge of God gained through theology does not afford a complete 
knowledge  and  a  complete  sense  of  the  divine  presence.  However,  when  gained 
through the method of the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition, it affords both complete 
knowledge and a total sense of the divine presence. God willing, all the parts of the 
Risale-i Nur perform the duty of an electric lamp on that light-filled highway of the 
Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition. 

Furthermore, however deficient in Muhyi’l-Din al-‘Arabi’s view the  knowledge 
of God was that Fakhr al-Din Razi obtained by means of theology, the knowledge of 
God  attained  on  the  Sufi  way  is  similarly  deficient  in  relation  to  the  knowledge 
obtained through the legacy of prophethood directly from the All-Wise Qur’an. For in 
order  to  attain  a  constant  sense  of  the  divine  presence,  the  way  of  Muhyi’l-Din  al-
‘Arabi said: “There is no existent save  He,” going so far as to deny the existence of 
the universe. As for the others, again to gain a constant sense of the divine presence, 
they  said:  “There  is  none  witnessed  save  He,”  entering  a  strange  state  as  though 
casting the universe into absolute oblivion.  

However,  the  knowledge  of  God  obtained  from  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  affords  a 
constant  sense  of  the  divine  presence,  but  it  neither  condemns  the  universe  to  non-
existence,  nor  imprisons  it  in  absolute  oblivion.  It  rather  releases  it  from  its 
purposelessness and employs it in Almighty God’s  

 

382

name.  Everything  becomes  a  mirror  yielding  knowledge  of  Him.  As  Sa‘di  Shirazi 
said: “To the conscious gaze every leaf is a book yielding knowledge of the divine.” 

In everything a window opens up onto knowledge of God. 
In  some  of  the  Words  we  have  illustrated  with  the  following  comparison  the 
differences between the way of the scholars of theology and the true highway taken 
from  the  Qur’an:  in  order  to  have  water,  some  is  brought  from  a  distant  place  by 
means of pipes, tunnelling through mountains. And some of it is obtained by digging 
wells everywhere. The first sort is fraught with difficulties; the pipes become blocked 
or  broken.  But  those  who  know  how  to  dig  wells  and  extract  water  can  find  water 
everywhere with no trouble. 

Similarly,  utilizing  the  impossibility  of  causation  and  causal  sequences,  the 
scholars of theology cut the chains of causes at the extremities of the world and then 
proved  the  existence  of  the  Necessarily  Existent  One.  They  travelled  a  long  road. 
However, the true highway of the Wise Qur’an finds water everywhere and extracts it. 
All its verses cause water to flow forth wherever they strike, like the Staff of Moses. 
Each makes everything recite the rule: “In  everything  is a sign indicating that  He  is 
One.” 

Furthermore,  faith  (îmân)  is  not  gained  only  through  knowledge;  many  of  the 
subtle faculties have their share of it. When food enters the stomach, it is distributed 
in  various  ways  to  various  members.  Similarly,  after  entering  the  stomach  of  the 
mind,  the  matters  of  faith  that  come  through  knowledge  are  absorbed  by  the  spirit, 
heart, inner heart, soul, and other subtle faculties; each receives its share according to 
its degree. If they do not receive their share, faith is deficient. Muhyi’l-Din al-‘Arabi 
was reminding Fakhr al-Din Razi of this point. 

Third Matter 

In  what  way  is  the  verse,  “We  have  honoured  the  sons  of  Adam”(17:70)  

conformable with the verse, “He was indeed unjust and foolish”(33:72)? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r:  There  are  explanations  in  the  Eleventh  and  Twenty-Third 
Words,  and  in  the  Second  Fruit  of  the  Fifth  Branch  of  the  Twenty-Fourth  Word.  A 
summary is as follows: 

With  His perfect power, Almighty God makes many things  from a single thing, 
causes one thing to perform numerous duties, and writes a thousand books on a single 
page;  so  too  He  created  man  as  a  comprehensive  species,  in  place of  many  species. 
That is to say, He willed that through  

 

383

man,  a  single  species,  functions  would be performed  to the  number of  the  different 
levels of all the animal  species. For this reason,  He placed no innate  limit on man’s 
powers  and  senses,  no  natural  restriction,  and  left  them  free.  Those  of  the  other 
animals are limited and naturally restricted. Whereas each of man’s powers may roam 
free over an endless distance towards infinity. For since he is a mirror to the infinite 
manifestations of the names of the universe’s Creator, his powers have been given an 
infinite capacity. 

For  example,  even  if  the  whole  world  were  given  to  man,  due  to  his  greed,  he 
would  say:  “Are  there  any  more?”(50:30)  And  due  to  his  selfishness,  he  finds  it 
acceptable that a thousand people should suffer harm for his own sake. And so on. He 
may  advance  endlessly  in  bad  morality  and  reach  the  degree  of  the  Nimrods  and 
Pharaohs; as is shown by the use of the intensive form in the verse above (33:72), he 
is  given  to  great  wrongdoing.  Similarly,  he  may  manifest  endless  progress  in  good 
morality, and rise to the level of the prophets and veracious ones. 

Moreover, contrary to the animals, man is ignorant about all the things necessary 
for life and is compelled to learn everything. He is in need of innumerable things, and 
therefore in accordance with the intensive form in the same verse, is “most ignorant.” 
But when animals come into the world, they need few things, and what they do need, 
everything necessary for their lives, they may learn in a couple of months, or even a 
couple  of  days,  or  in  some  cases,  in  a  couple  of  hours.  It  is  as  if  they  have  been 
perfected in another world and come thus. But man can only rise to his feet in one or 
two years, and only in fifteen can distinguish between what is beneficial and what is 
harmful. The intensive form of “most ignorant” indicates this too. 

Fourth Matter 

You ask concerning the wisdom contained in [the Hadith]: “Renew your belief by 
means of ‘There is no god but God.’”3 The wisdom in it has been mentioned in many 
of the Words and one aspect of it is as follows: 

Since  man  himself  and  the  world  in  which  he  lives  are  being  continuously 
renewed, he needs constantly to renew his faith. For in reality each individual human 
being consists of many individuals. He may be considered a different individual to the 
number of the years of his life, or to the  

                                                 
3 Musnad, ii, 359; al-Mundhiri, al-Targhib wa’l-Tarhib, ii, 415; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 256; al-
Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, i, 52. 

 

384

number of its days or even hours. For since a single individual is subject to time, he is 
like a model and each passing day clothes him in the form of another individual. 

Furthermore, just as there is within man this plurality and renewal, so also is the 
world  in  which  he  lives  in  motion.  It  goes  and  is  replaced  by  another.  It  varies 
constantly. Every day opens the door of another world. As for faith, it is both the light 
of the life of each individual in that person, and it is the light of the world in which he 
lives. And as for “There is no god but God,” it is a key with which to turn on the light. 
Then the instinctual soul, desire, doubts, and Satan exercise great influence over 
man. In order to damage his faith, they are much of the time able to take advantage of 
his negligence, to trick him with their wiles, and thus to extinguish the light of belief 
with  doubts  and  uncertainty.  Also,  man  is  prone  to  act  and  utter  words  which 
apparently oppose the Shari‘a, and which in the view of some religious authorities are 
no  less  than  unbelief.  Therefore,  there  is  a  need  to  renew  belief  all  the  time,  every 
hour, every day. 

Q u e s t i o n : The masters of scholastic theology wrapped up the world in the 
abbreviated concepts of contingency and createdness and having disposed of it, so to 
speak,  proved  divine  unity.  And  one  school  of  Sufis,  in  order  to  experience  God’s 
presence and affirm His unity fully, said: “Nothing is observed but Him.” They thus 
forgot the universe and drew the veil of oblivion  over it, and then  fully experienced 
the divine presence. Another school of Sufis, in order to truly affirm divine unity and 
enter God’s presence at the highest degree, said: “There is no existent but Him.” They 
relegated the universe to the  level of  imagination and cast  it into non-existence, and 
then fully entered the divine presence. But you point out that in the Qur’an is a mighty 
highway besides these three ways. And you say that its mark is the phrases: “There is 
nothing sought but Him,” and, “There is nothing worshipped but Him.” Can you show 
me  a  brief  proof  of  the  affirmation  of  divine  unity  that  this  highway  provides  and 
point out a short way leading to it? 

T h e  A n s w e r : All the Words and Letters of the Risale-i Nur point out that 
highway. For now, as you wish, we shall indicate concisely an extensive, lengthy and 
mighty proof of it. 

Every thing in the world ascribes every other thing to its own Creator. And every 
artistically  fashioned  object  in  this  world  demonstrates  that  all  such  objects  are  the 
works  of  its  own  fashioner.  And  every  creative  act  in  the  universe  proves  that  all 
creative acts are the acts of  its author. And every name that is manifested in beings 
indicates that all names are the  

 

385

names and titles of the one whom it  signifies. That is to say, every thing  is a direct 
proof of divine unity and a window yielding knowledge of God. 

An object, especially  if it  is animate,  is a miniature specimen of the universe, a 
seed of the world, and a fruit of the globe of the earth. Since this is so, the one who 
created the miniature specimen, seed and fruit must also be the one who created the 
universe. For the creator of the fruit cannot be other than the creator of the tree that 
bears it. 

And so, in the same way that every object ascribes every other object to its own 
fashioner,  every  act  ascribes  every  other  act  to  its  author.  For  we  see  that  each 
creative  act  appears  as  the  tip  of  a  law  of  creativity  that  is  so  extensive  as  to 
encompass  most  other  creatures,  and  so  long  as  to  reach  from  particles  to  galaxies. 
That is to say, whoever performs the creative act must be the author of all the creative 
acts which are tied to the universal  law that encompasses those beings and stretches 
from particles to galaxies. 

For sure, the one who gives life to a fly must be the one who creates all insects 
and  animals  and  who  gives  life  to  the  earth.  And whoever  spins  particles  as  though 
they were Mevlevi dervishes must be the one who sets successive beings in motion as 
far as the sun travelling through the skies with its planets. For the law is a chain and 
the creative acts are tied to it. 

That is to say, just as all objects ascribe all other objects to their fashioner, and all 
creative acts attribute all other acts to its author, in exactly the same way, every divine 
name  manifested  in  the  universe  ascribes  every  other  name  to  the  One  whom  it 
describes and proves that they are His titles. For the names manifested in the universe 
are like intersecting circles, blending one with the other like the seven colours in light; 
they assist one another and perfect and adorn one another’s works of art. 

For example, the instant the name of Giver of Life is manifested on a thing and 
life is given, the name of All-Wise also becomes manifest; it orders the body which is 
that  animate creature’s dwelling-place  with  wisdom.  At  the  same  time,  the  name  of 
Munificent  is  manifested;  it  adorns  the  creature’s  dwelling-place.  So  too,  the 
manifestation of the name of All-Compassionate appears; it presents the body’s needs 
benevolently. At the same instant, the manifestation of the name of Provider appears; 
it supplies the material and spiritual sustenance necessary for the continued existence 
of the animate creature in unexpected ways. And so on. This means that to whomever 
the  name  of  Giver  of  Life  belongs,  the  name  of  All-Wise,  which  is  luminous  and 
comprehensive  in  the  universe,  is  also  His.  The  name  of  All-Compassionate,  which 
nurtures all creatures kindly, is His too. And the name of Provider, which sustains all 
animate creatures munificently, is His name and title. And so on. 

 

386

That is to say, every name, every act, every object is a proof of divine unity, and 
a  proof  that  is  a  stamp  of  divine  unity  (vahdaniyet)  and  a  seal  of  divine  oneness 
(ehadiyet) which has been inscribed on the pages of the universe and on the lines of 
the centuries. All of them indicate that all the words of the universe, which are called 
beings, are inscriptions traced by the pen of its own scribe. 

O  God!  Grant  blessings  to  the  one  who  said:  “The  best  thing  I  and  the 
prophets  before  me  have  said  is,  ‘There  is  no  god  but  God.’”4  and  to  his 
Family and Companions, and grant them peace. 

Fifth Matter 

S e  c o  n d  l  y  :   You  ask  in  your  letter  whether  “There  is  no  god but  God”  is 
sufficient on  its own. That  is, intending the second part,  you ask: can someone who 
does  not  say  “Muhammad  is  the  Messenger  of  God”  find  salvation?  The  answer  to 
this is lengthy, so for now we shall only say this: 

The  two  parts  of  the  confession  of  faith  cannot  be  separated;  they  prove  each 
other,  comprise  each  other;  one  cannot  be  without  the  other.  Since  the  Messenger 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) was the Seal of the Prophets and the heir of all 
the prophets, he is at the start of all the ways leading to God. There can be no way to 
reality  and  salvation  outside  his  mighty  highway.  All  the  leading  gnostics  and 
verifiers  of  reality  have  said  like  Sa‘di  Shirazi:  “It  is  impossible,  Sa‘di,  to  be 
victorious on the way of salvation, except by following Mustafa.” They also said: “All 
ways are closed except the highway of Muhammad.” 

However,  it  sometimes  happens  that  people  are  on  the  highway  of  Muhammad 

(UWBP) and within it, but are not aware of it. 

And  it  sometimes  happens that  they  do not  know  the  Prophet  (UWBP),  but  the 

road they have taken is part of his highway. 

It happens too that because they are in a state of ecstasy or entirely immersed in 
contemplation or have withdrawn from the world, they do not think of the highway of 
Muhammad, and “There is no god but God” is sufficient for them.  

Nevertheless, the most important side of the matter is this: non-acceptance is one 

thing, while the acceptance of non-being is another.  

                                                 
4 Muwatta’, Qur’an, 32; Hajj 246; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 353; al-Albani, Sahih al-Jami’ al-
Saghir, no: 1113. 

 

387

Ecstatics and recluses or those who have not heard or are uninformed about it, do not 
know  the  Prophet  (UWBP)  or  they  do  not  think  of him  that  they  might  accept  him. 
They  are  ignorant  in  that  respect.  They  know  “There  is  no  god  but  God”  only  in 
respect of esoteric knowledge of Him. They may well be saved. But if those people 
who  have  heard  of  the  Prophet  (UWBP)  and  know  his  message  do  not  affirm  him, 
they do not recognize Almighty God. For them, the phrase “There is no god but God” 
on  its  own  does  not  express  divine  unity,  the  affirmation  of  which  is  a  means  of 
salvation.  For  this  is  not  ignorant  non-acceptance,  which  may  be  excusable  to  a 
degree,  it  is  rather  the  acceptance  of  non-being,  which  is  denial.  The  person  who 
denies Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings and peace), who with his miracles and 
works  was the  pride  of  the  universe  and  glory  of mankind,  certainly  cannot receive 
any light and will not recognize God. However, that is enough for now. 

Sixth Matter 

T h i r d l y :  Some of the terms used in the First Topic, which is about Satan’s 
way  and  is  called  Dispute  With  the  Devil,  were  very  vehement, although  they  were 
modified  with  expressions  like  “God  forbid!  God  forbid!”  and  “to  suppose  the 
impossible.” They still make me tremble. There were a few small modifications in the 
piece that was later sent to you; have you been able to correct your copy accordingly? 
It’s up  to  you  to do  what  you  think;  you  can  skip  any  of  the  expressions  you  think 
unnecessary. 

My dear brother, that Topic holds great importance, because Satan is the atheists’ 
master. Only when he is silenced will his imitators cease to be deceived. The fact that 
the All-Wise Qur’an mentions the unbelievers’ vile expressions gave me courage. In 
order to demonstrate the complete worthlessness of that diabolical way, trembling and 
by way of supposing the impossible, I used the ridiculous expressions the members of 
Satan’s  Party  are  compelled  by  their  way  to  accept  and  which  willy  nilly  they  utter 
through  its tongue. And by using them, we cornered them at the bottom of the well 
and  took  possession  of  the  whole  field  on  account  of  the  Qur’an;  we  exposed  their 
frauds. Consider the victory through the following comparison: 

For example, let us imagine a tall minaret the top of which touches the skies, and 
at  the  base  of  which  a  well  has  been  dug  that  goes  down  to  the  centre  of  the  earth. 
Two groups are disputing over proving where, between the top of the minaret and the 
bottom of the well, a man stands for his call  

 

388

to prayer to be heard by all the people throughout the country. The first  group says: 
“He  has  to  be  at  the  top  of  the  minaret  reciting  the  call  to  prayer  to  the  universe, 
because we hear it. It is vibrant; it is lofty. For sure everyone cannot see him in that 
high position, but everyone can see him according to their degree on one of the steps 
when he climbs the minaret and when he descends it. They know that he ascends it, 
and that wherever it is that he appears, he is someone of high stature.” However, the 
other,  satanic  and  foolish,  group  says:  “No,  his  position  is  not  at  the  top  of  the 
minaret; it’s at the bottom of the well, wherever it is he appears.” But no one at all has 
seen him at the bottom of the well, nor can they see him there. Let us suppose he was 
as heavy and lacking in will as a stone; surely  he would have been at the bottom of 
the well and someone would have seen him there. 

Now, the battlefield of these two opposing groups is the long distance stretching 
from  the  top  of  the  minaret  to  the  bottom  of  the  well.  The  people  of  light,  called 
God’s  Party,  point  out  the  mu’ezzin  at  the  top  of  the  minaret  to  those  with  a  lofty 
view. And to those whose sight cannot rise that far and to the short-sighted, they point 
him  out  on  a  step  each  according  to  his  degree.  A  slight  hint  is  enough  for  them, 
proving  that  the  mu’ezzin  is  not  a  lifeless  block  of  stone,  but  a  perfect  man  who 
climbs upwards and appears and makes the call to prayer when he wishes. As for the 
other  group,  known  as  Satan’s  Party,  they  pronounce  stupidly:  “Show  him  to 
everyone at the top of the minaret, or else his place is the bottom of the well.” In their 
folly  they  do  not  know  that  he  is  not  shown  to  everyone  at  the  top  of  the  minaret 
because  everyone’s  sight  does  not  rise  that  far.  Also,  in  exaggerated  fashion,  they 
want  to  claim  possession  of  the  whole  distance  with  the  exception  of  the  top of the 
minaret. 

Then  someone  appears  intending  to  solve  the  dispute  between  the  two 
communities.  He  says  to  Satan’s  Party:  “You  inauspicious  group!  If  the  supreme 
mu’ezzin’s  position  was  at  the  bottom  of  the  well,  he  would  have  been  as  lifeless, 
inanimate, and powerless as a stone. It could not have been him who appeared on the 
well’s steps and minaret’s degrees. Since you saw him on the latter, he is certain not 
to be powerless and lifeless. His position must be at the top of the minaret. In which 
case, either show that he is at the bottom of the well – which you can’t, nor can you 
make anyone believe that he is there – or be silent! The arena of your defence is the 
well bottom. The remaining space and that  long distance is the arena of this blessed 
community; they  have only to point him out somewhere other than at the bottom of 
the well, to win the case.” 

Like this comparison, the Topic about the dispute with the Devil takes  

 

389

the long distance from the divine throne to the ground from Satan’s Party and forcibly 
drives them into a corner. It leaves the most irrational, the most impossible, the most 
loathsome  place  to them.  It  drives  them  into a  hole  so  narrow  no one  could enter  it 
and takes possession of the entire distance in the name of the Qur’an. 

If they are asked what the Qur’an is and they reply: “It is a good book, written by 
man, that teaches good morality,” they should be told: “It must then be the Word of 
God and you have to accept it as such, for according to your way, you cannot say that 
it is ‘good’!” 

If they are asked what they know about the Prophet (UWBP), and they reply: “He 
was a very clever person with good morals,” they should be told: “You should believe 
in him in that case, because if he was very moral and clever, he must have been God’s 
Messenger. You say he was ‘good,’ but that is unacceptable according to your creed; 
you can’t say that.” And so on. Further aspects of the reality can be applied to other 
facets of the comparison. 

In  consequence,  the  First  Topic,  in  which  the  Devil  is  disputed  with,  does  not 
mean that the believers have to know about the miracles of Muhammad (UWBP) and 
learn about their certain proofs in order to preserve their faith. A slight hint, a small 
indication, will save it. All the deeds, all the qualities, all the conduct of Muhammad 
(UWBP) are miracles of a sort, proving that his position is at the highest of the high, 
not at the lowest of the low at the bottom of the well. 

Seventh Matter 

An instructive matter: 

[Because  some  of  my  friends  have  groundless  worries  and  are 
becoming dispirited, I am  obliged to  relate  a dominical favour and an 
instance  of  divine  protection  which  pertain  solely  to  service  of  the 
Qur’an,  in  order  to  strengthen  their  morale,  and  since  they  have  that 
weak  vein  of  temperament,  to  save  them.  What  I  have  to  say  is 
suggested  by  seven  signs.  Four  of  them  show  how  those  friends 
received blows entirely contrary to their intentions, as a result of their 
taking up hostile positions towards me not personally but  

 

390

because I serve the Qur’an, purely for worldly  aims and  despite being 
friends. The three other signs denote earnest and constant friends who 
in  order  to  find  favour  with  the  worldly5  and  achieve  some  worldly 
goal, and so that they could feel confident, temporarily failed to display 
the  manly  stance  demanded  by  friendship.  However,  regretably,  all 
those  three  friends  were  punished  in  ways  that  were  the  opposite  of 
what they had intended.] 

The first four, who were seemingly friends but later displayed enmity:  
The First: Employing various means, a District Officer begged me for a copy of 
the Tenth Word. I gave  him one. But then,  in order to be promoted, he spurned my 
friendship  and  turned  hostile  to  me.  This  took  the  form  of  complaining  to  the 
Governor and informing on me. But as a mark of favour for service of the Qur’an, he 
was not promoted, but dismissed. 

The Second: Another District Officer assumed a competitive and hostile  stance 
towards me although he was a friend, for the sake of his superiors and to attract the 
attention  of  the  worldly,  but  he  received  a  blow  contrary  to  his  intentions.  He  was 
sentenced  to  two  and  a  half  years’  imprisonment  owing  to  some  unforeseen  matter. 
Later  he  asked  for  prayers  from  a  servant  of  the  Qur’an.  Perhaps  he  will  be  saved, 
God willing, since prayers were offered for him. 

The Third: A teacher appeared to be a friend and I looked on him as one. Then 
he  moved  to  Barla  to  settle  there  and  he  chose  to  adopt  a  hostile  stance.  But  he 
received a blow contrary to his intentions: he was posted away from teaching to serve 
in the army. He was sent away from Barla. 

The  Fourth:  There  was  a  teacher,  who  because  he  seemed  to  me  to  be  both  a 
hafiz6 and pious, I was sincerely friendly towards him in the hope that he would show 
friendship  to  me  by  serving  the  Qur’an.  Then,  in  order  to  curry  favour  with  the 
worldly, he behaved very coldly towards us and was frightened, because of one single 
thing an official  had said. He too received a blow contrary to his  intentions:  he was 
severely reprimanded by the inspector, and dismissed. 

These  four  men  received  those  blows  because  of  their  animosity.  However, the 
following  three  friends  did  not  display  the  manly  attitude  that  serious  friendship 
demands, and so received not blows, but warnings contrary to their intentions, which 
were admonitions of a sort. 

The  First:  A  respected  person  who  was  a  most  important,  serious,  and  true 

student of mine used to write out the Words continually and dissemi 

                                                 
5 “The worldly” (ehl-i dünya): those people whose view is restricted to the life of this world, and who 
disregard the hereafter, or those who sell religion for this world. (Tr.) 
6 Hafız: a person who has memorized the whole Qur’an. (Tr.) 

 

391

nate them. But when a confused high official arrived and an incident occurred, he hid 
the Words he had written. He also temporarily gave up copying them out in the hope 
that  he  would  not  suffer  any  difficulty  or  hardship  at  the  hands  of  the  worldly  and 
would  be  safe  from  their  evil.  But  as  a  mark  of  his  error  of  temporarily  ceasing  to 
serve  the  Qur’an,  for  a  year  he  continuously  suffered  the  calamity  of  having  a 
thousand-lira  fine  hanging  over  him,  which  he  had  to  pay.  Then  the  moment  he 
formed the intention to write out more copies and returned to his former position, he 
was cleared in the case, till finally, praise be to God, he was acquitted. He was poor 
and needy, and was saved from paying a thousand liras. 

The  Second:  Intending  to  gain  the  good  opinion  of  the  worldly  and  the  new 
officer,  a  courageous,  serious,  and  bold  friend  of  mine  of  five  years’  standing 
unthinkingly and involuntarily did not meet with me for several months, despite being 
my neighbour. He did not even pay me a visit during Ramadan or the Festival. But the 
village question turned out exactly the opposite of what he had intended, and he lost 
his influence. 

The  Third:  A  hafiz  who  used  to  visit  me  once  or  twice  a  week  became  the 
prayer-leader, and so that he could wear the turban, deserted me for two months. He 
did not even visit me during the Festival. But contrary to his intention, and contrary to 
usual practice, he was not allowed to wear a turban, even after seven or eight months. 
There have been numerous incidents like these, but I have not mentioned them so 
as not to offend the people concerned. Each of them is only a sign, but when they are 
put together one perceives a  strength.  It gives one the  conviction that – not directed 
towards  myself,  for  I  do  not  consider  myself  worthy  of  any  favour,  but  purely  in 
respect of serving the Qur’an – we carry out that service under dominical protection 
and through divine grace. My friends should think of this and not be carried away by 
groundless fears. I have explained these things to them privately because our service 
is a divine bestowal, and because it is the cause of thanks not pride, and because the 
Qur’an commands: 

But the bounty of your Sustainer rehearse and proclaim.(93:11) 

Eighth Matter 

 [This forms the footnote to the third example in the Third Point about 
the  fifth  of  the  obstacles  to  making  independent  judgements  of  the 
divine law (ijtihad), in the Twenty-Seventh Word.] 

 

392

A n  I m p o r t a n t  Q u e s t i o n : Some of the verifiers of reality have said 
that each of the words of the Qur’an and of supplications and other glorifications of 
God  illuminate  man’s  spiritual  faculties  in  numerous  ways,  providing  spiritual 
sustenance. But if the meanings are  not known, just to say the words is  insufficient. 
The words are a garment; would it not be more useful if they were changed, and every 
group clothed the meanings in words of their own language? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  The  words  of  the  Qur’an  and  of  the  glorifications  of  the 
Prophet  (UWBP)  are  not  lifeless  garments;  they  are  like  the  living  skin  of  a  body; 
indeed, with the passage of time, they have become the skin. Garments are changed, 
but  the  body  would  be  harmed  if  the  skin  were  to  be  changed.  Blessed  words  like 
those of the five daily prayers and the call to prayer have become the mark and sign of 
their usual meanings. And marks and signs cannot be changed. I have often observed 
in myself an inner state which I experience. It is a fact, and is this: 

On the Day of ‘Arafa, the eve of the Festival of Sacrifices, I used to recite Sura 
al-Ikhlas hundreds of times.7 I would observe that some of the non-physical senses in 
me would receive the  sustenance several times, then would cease to do so and stop. 
Others  like  the  faculty  of  reflective  thought  would  turn  towards  the  meaning  for  a 
time,  receive  their  share,  then  they  too  would  stop.  And  some  like  the  heart  would 
receive their share in respect of certain concepts that yielded a spiritual pleasure, then 
they  too  would  fall  silent.  And  so  on.  Gradually,  with  repetition  only  a  few  of  the 
subtle  faculties  would  remain,  becoming  wearied  long  after  the  others.  They  would 
persist, leaving no need for further study and meanings. Heedlessness did not have an 
adverse  effect  on  them,  as  it  did  on  the  faculty  of  thought.  The  usual  meanings,  of 
which  they  were  the  marks  and  signs,  and  abbreviated  meanings  of  the  expressive 
words,  were  enough  for  them.  To  think  of  the  meaning  at  that  point  would  have 
caused  harmful  boredom.  Anyway,  the  subtle  faculties  that  persist  do  not  need  to 
study and comprehend but to recollect, turn towards, and be prompted. And the words 
that are  like skin are sufficient for them and perform the duty of meaning. They are 
means  of  constant  effulgence  especially  when  it  is  recalled  through  those  Arabic 
words that they are the Word of God and divine speech. 

This  state,  which  I  myself  experienced,  shows  that  it  is  extremely  harmful  to 

express in another language truths like the call to prayer and the tes 

                                                 
7 For Hadiths about the merits of reciting Sura al-Ikhlas (Sura 112) specific numbers of times, see, 
Tirmidhi, Fada’il al-Qur’an, 11; Musnad, iii, 437; Darimi, Fada’il al-Qur’an, 24; al-Suyuti, al-Fath al-
Kabir, iii, 227; Bayhaqi, Shu’ab al-Iman, ii, 506-8. 

 

393

bihat  following  the  obligatory  prayers,  and  frequently  repeated Suras  of  the  Qur’an 
like Fatiha and Ikhlas. For when the perpetual spring of the divine words and words 
of the Prophet (UWBP) are lost, the perpetual share of those perpetual subtle faculties 
is also lost. Also harmful are the loss of the minimum of ten merits for each word, and 
the heedlessness and darkness of spirit caused by the human terms of the translations, 
since the constant sense of the divine presence does continue for everyone throughout 
the prayers. 

Yes, just like Imam-i A‘zam said that “There is no god but God” is the mark and 
sign of the affirmation of divine unity, so we say the following: the great majority of 
the  words  of  divine  glorification  and  praise,  and  especially  of  those  of  the  call  to 
prayer  and  obligatory  prayers,  have  come  to  be  marks  and  signs.  Like  signs,  their 
usual  Sharî‘î  meanings  are  understood,  rather  than  their  literal  meanings.  So 
according to the Shari‘a, it is not possible to change them. Even an uneducated man 
can learn the gist of them, which all believers should know; that is, their meanings in 
summary. How can those people who pass their whole  lives with Islam yet  fill their 
heads  with  endless  trivia  be  excused  from  learning  in  one  or  two  weeks  the  gist  of 
what these blessed words mean, which are the  key  to eternal  life?  How can they be 
Muslims? How can they be called “reasonable people”? It surely is not reasonable to 
destroy the protective cases of those springs of light for the sake of lazy loafers like 
them! 

Furthermore,  whatever  nation  a  person  belongs  to,  he  understands  from 
“Subhanallah! Glory be to God!” that he is declaring Almighty God free of all defect. 
Isn’t  this  enough?  If  he  inclines  towards  the  meaning  in  his  own  language,  he  will 
study it once with his intellect. But if he repeats it a hundred times a day in its proper 
form, apart from his intellect’s share of studying, the gist of it, which is derived from 
the  words  and  spreads  and  blends  with  them,  will  produce  many  lights  and  much 
effulgence. The sacredness  he receives  from the  words being divine  speech, and the 
effulgence and lights proceeding from the sacredness, are especially important. 

I  n    S  h  o  r  t  :  Nothing  at all  can  replace  the  sacred divine  words  that  are the 
protective  cases  of  the  essentials  of  religion,  and  nothing  can  substitute  them,  and 
nothing else can perform their functions. Even if they can express them temporarily, 
they  cannot  do  so  permanently  or  in  sacred  and  elevated  fashion.  As  for  the  words 
that are the protective cases of the theoretical matters of religion, there is no necessity 
for  them  to be  changed.  For  such  a  need  is  met  by  preaching,  teaching,  advice,  and 
other instruction. 

T o  C o n c l u d e : The comprehensiveness of the grammatical Arabic language 

and the miraculousness of the Qur’an’s words make them untranslat 

 

394

able.  I  can  say  even  that  their  translation  is  impossible.  Anyone  who  doubts  this 
should  refer  to  the  Twenty-Fifth  Word.  What  they  call  translations  are  abbreviated, 
deficient approximations. How can such approximations be compared with the living, 
true meanings of the Qur’an’s verses, which have many aspects of ramification? 

Ninth Matter 

important,  confidential  matter,  and  a  mystery  related 

to 

 [An 
sainthood.] 

The  largest  group  in  the  World  of  Islam,  the  people  of  truth  and  moderation, 
called  the  Ahl  al-Sunna  wa’l-Jama‘at  or  Sunnis,  have  preserved  the  truths  of  the 
Qur’an  and  faith  by  following  to  the  letter  the  illustrious  practices  (T.  sünnet;  Ar. 
sunna) of the Prophet (UWBP) within the bounds of moderation. The great majority 
of the  saints  have  emerged from within this sphere. Others  have appeared outside it 
and on a path opposed to some of the Sunnis’ principles and rules. Observers of this 
latter group of saints have divided into two groups: 

One group has denied their sainthood because they oppose the Sunnis’ principles. 

This group has even gone so far as to declare some of those saints unbelievers. 

The other group consists of their followers. They accept their sainthood and say: 
“The  truth  is  not  restricted  to  the  Sunnis’  way.”  They  have  formed  a  group  of 
innovators and have taken the path of misguidance. They do not know that everyone 
who  is  rightly-guided  cannot  be  a  guide.  Their  shaikhs  are  to  be  excused  for  their 
mistakes because they are ecstatics, but their followers may not be excused. 

As for the middle group, they do not deny the saints’ sainthood, but do not accept 
their  ways  and  paths.  They  say:  “Any  things  they  say  that  are  opposed  to  the 
principles [of religion] are either metaphorical utterances the meaning of which is not 
known, or they [the saints] are in error, being overcome by their inward states.” 

Unfortunately,  intending  to  protect  the  Sunni  way,  the  first  group,  especially 
literalist  scholars,  have  denied  saints  of  great  importance  and  been  compelled  to 
accuse  them  of  misguidance.  While  the  saints’  supporters,  which  form  the  second 
group, have abandoned the right path due to their excessive good will towards shaikhs 
of that sort; they have fallen into innovation, and even misguidance. 

 

395

In  connection  with  this,  for  a  long  time  a  matter  preoccupied  my  mind:  at  a 
crucial  time  I  execrated  a  group  of  the  people  of  misguidance.  Then  an  awesome 
collective  strength arose in the face of my malediction; it both turned it back on me 
and prevented me from repeating it. 

Then I saw that facilitated by a collective strength in its wrongful activities, that 
group of the people of misguidance was dragging the people along behind it. It was 
being successful. This was not due to compulsion alone; rather, since it had combined 
with  a  desire  aroused  by  the  power  of  sainthood,  some  of  the  believers  were  being 
carried away by it; they looked on the group favourably and did not consider it to be 
too bad. 

I took fright when I perceived these two secrets. “Glory be to God!” I exclaimed, 
“can there be a sainthood other than that of the true way? Would the people of reality 
support  such  a  terrible  current  of  misguidance?”  Then  one  blessed  Day  of  ‘Arafat, 
following a praiseworthy Islamic practice, I recited Sura al-Ikhlas hundreds of times 
and through its blessings, the matter entitled “Answer to an Important Question” was 
imparted  to  my  impotent  heart,  together  with  the  following  truth,  through  divine 
mercy:  

As is told in the well-known, meaningful story of Jibali Baba, which dates from 
the time of Sultan Mehmed the Conqueror, some saints are in a state of ecstasy while 
appearing to be rational and reasonable. Others sometimes appear to be sober and in 
command of their reasoning  faculties, and sometimes they enter a state outside this. 
One class of this sort are confused and cannot distinguish between things. They apply 
a matter they see while in a state of intoxication to things after they have returned to a 
state  of  sobriety.  They  are  then  in  error  but  do  not  realize  it.  Some  ecstatics  are 
preserved  by  God  and  do  not  enter  misguidance  on  their  spiritual  journeying.  But 
others  are  not  preserved,  and  may  be  found  in  the  sects  following  innovation  and 
misguidance. They have even been held to be unbelievers. 

Thus,  because  they  are  temporarily  or  permanently  in  a  state  of  ecstasy,  they 
resemble  “blessed  lunatics.”  And  because  they  resemble  them,  they  are  not 
responsible. And because they  are not responsible, they are  not punishable. On their 
ecstatic  sainthood  persisting,  they  come  to  support  the  people  of  misguidance  and 
innovation;  they  spread  their  ways  to  an  extent,  and  inauspiciously  cause  some 
believers and people of truth to enter them. 

 

396

Tenth Matter 

 [It was requested by some friends that a principle concerning visitors 
be explained. That is the reason this was written.] 

It should be known that those who visit me either come in respect of worldly life, 
and that door is closed; or they come in respect of the life of the hereafter, and in that 
respect there are two doors: either they come supposing my person to be blessed and 
to possess high spiritual rank, and that door is closed too. For I do not like myself and 
I do not like people who like me. All thanks be to Almighty God that He did not make 
me like myself. Or they come purely in respect of my being a herald of the All-Wise 
Qur’an. I willingly accept anyone who enters by  this door. Such people are of three 
sorts: they are either friends, or brothers, or students. 

The characteristics of friends and conditions of their friendship: They have to 
earnestly support our work and service connected with the Words and the lights of the 
Qur’an.  They  should  not  support  injustice,  innovations,  or  misguidance  in  heartfelt 
fashion. They should themselves try to profit from the Words.  

The  characteristics  of  brothers  and  conditions  of  their  brotherhood: 
Together  with  truly  and  earnestly  working  to  disseminate  the  Words,  they  should 
perform the five obligatory prayers and not commit the seven grievous sins. 

The characteristics of students and conditions of their studentship: To feel as 
though  the  Words  are  their  own  property  written  by  themselves,  and  to  know  their 
vital duty, their life’s work, to be the service and dissemination of them. 

These  three  levels  are  connected  with  my  three  personalities.  A  friend  is 
connected with my  individual, essential personality. A brother is connected with the 
personality that springs from my worship and bondsmanship of Almighty God. And a 
student  is  connected with  the  personality  that  undertakes  the  duties  of  herald  of the 
Wise Qur’an and teacher. 

Such meetings yield three fruits: 
The First: In regard to being herald, it is to receive instruction about the jewels 

of the Qur’an from either myself or the Words. Even if it is only a single lesson. 

The  Second:  In  respect  of  worship,  it  is  to  have  a  share  of  my  gains  of  the 

hereafter. 

The Third: It is to turn together towards the divine court, and binding  

 

397

our hearts to Almighty God and seeking success and guidance, to work together in the 
service of the All-Wise Qur’an. 

If  a  student,  every  morning  he  is  with  me  in  name  and  sometimes  also  in 

imagination, and he receives a share. 

If  a  brother,  he  is  several  times  together  with  me  with  his  particular  name  and 
form  in  my  supplications  and  gains,  and  he  receives  a  share.  Then  he  is  included 
among all the brothers, and I hand him over to divine mercy so that when I say “my 
brothers and sisters” in prayer, he is among them. If I do not know them, divine mercy 
knows them and sees them. 

If a friend who performs the obligatory prayers and gives up grievous sins, he is 
included  in  my  prayers  together  with  all  the  brothers.  My  condition  is  that  all  three 
categories include me in their supplications and spiritual gains. 

O God! Grant blessings to the one who said: “The believer is to the believer 
like a well-founded building, with one part strengthening the other,”8 and to 
his Family and Companions, and grant them peace. 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise!(2:32) 
And they shall say: “Praise be to God, who has guided us to this [felicity]; 
never  could  we  have  found  guidance,  had  it  not  been  for  the  guidance  of 
God; indeed it was the truth that the Messengers of our Sustainer brought to 
us!”(7:43) 
O God, Who responded to Noah among his people, * And helped Abraham 
before  his  enemies,  *  And  returned  Joseph  to  Jacob,  *  And  raised  Job’s 
suffering from him, * And answered the prayer of Zakariya, * And responded 
to Jonah b. Matta; we implore You through the mystery of those who offered 
these  answered  prayers  that  You  preserve  me  and  those  who  disseminate 
these treatises and their companions from the evil of satans among jinn and 
men, and help us in the face of our enemies, and do not leave us to our own 
devices,  and  remove  our  anxieties  and  their  anxieties,  and  heal  the 
sicknesses of our hearts and of their hearts. Amen. Amen. Amen. 

                                                 
8 See, Bukhari, Salat, 88; Adab, 36; Mazalim, 5; Muslim, Birr, 18; Nasa’i, Zakat, 67; Musnad, iv, 405, 
409. 

 

398

*    *    * 

The Twenty-Seventh Letter 

[This consists of estimable letters, which are pure reality, written by the author of the 
Risale-i Nur to his  students, as well as  some written by the Risale-i Nur students to 
their  Master,  and  to  each  other,  describing  the  blessings  and  effulgence  they  had 
received from studying the Risale-i Nur. It has not been included here since is three or 
four times the size of the present collection, and has been published separately under 
the titles of Barla Lahikası, Kastamonu Lahikası, and Emirdağ Lahikası.] 

 

*    *    * 

 

399

TheTwenty-Eighth Letter 

 [This letter consists of eight matters] 

The First Matter, 
which is the First Part 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
If it be that you can interpret dreams.(12:43) 

S e c o n d l y : You want me to interpret now the dream you had three years ago 
three  days  after  meeting  me,  whose  meaning  has  long  since  become apparent.  That 
beautiful, happy, and auspicious dream has been consigned to the past, so I’m right to 
say the following regarding it, am I not? 

I am neither the night nor a lover of the night; * I am a servant of the Sun; it 

Those  illusions  which  are  the  snare  of  the  saints,  *  Are  the  moon-faced 

is of the Sun that I speak.1 

reflections of the garden of God.2 

Yes, my brother, we have become accustomed to discussing with  you teachings 
concerning pure reality (hakikat), but to study dreams, the doors of which are open to 
fancy and illusion in order to ascertain reality, is not completely in keeping with our 
way  of  researching  into  and  verifying  reality.  So  in  connection  with  that  minor 
incident  of  sleep,  we  shall  explain  six  points  about  the  reality  of  sleep,  the  small 
brother of death,3 according to  

                                                 
1 Imam Rabbani, al-Maktubat, i, 124 (No: 130). 
2 Jalal al-Din al-Rumi, Mathnawi, 10. 
3 al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, x, 415; Daylami, Musnad al-Firdaws, iv, 309. 

 

400

scholarly  principles  and  from  the  angle  indicated  by  verses  of  the  Qur’an.  In  the 
seventh, we shall offer a brief interpretation of your dream. 

Just  as  an  important  element  of  Sura  Yusuf  is  Yusuf’s  dream,  so  the  Qur’an 

indicates with many of its verses, such as: 

And We made your sleep for rest(78:9) 

that dreams and sleep may hold important, though veiled, truths. 

The First 

The Second  

Verifiers  of  reality  do  not  favour  trusting  in  the  interpretation  of  dreams  and 
taking  of  omens  through  the  Qur’an.  For  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  strikes  at  the 
unbelievers frequently and severely, and if such severity is shown towards the person 
who  takes  omens,  it  causes  him  to  despair  and  confuses  his  heart.  Dreams  also, 
because although they are good they are thought to be evil and sometimes appear to 
be opposed to reality, may cause a person to fall into despair, destroy his morale, and 
make  him  think  badly  of  things.  There  are  many  dreams  the  meanings  and 
interpretations  of  which  are  very  good  although  the  form  they  take  is  terrifying, 
injurious,  or  unclean.  Not  everyone  can  discover  the  relation  between  the  form  a 
dream takes and its true meaning, so they become unnecessarily anxious, despairing, 
and unhappy. It was only because of this aspect of dreams that, like Imam-i Rabbani 
and the verifiers of reality, I said at the beginning: “I am neither the night nor a lover 
of the night.” 

An  authentic Hadith  states that one of the forty parts of prophethood was made 
manifest in the form of true dreams during sleep,4 which means that true dreams are 
both valid and have a connection with the functions of prophethood. This Third Point 
is  both  important,  and  lengthy  and  profound,  and  related  to  prophethood,  so  I  am 
postponing it to another time and not opening this door for now. 

The Third  

The Fourth  

Dreams  are  of  three  sorts.5  Two  of  them,  in  the  words  of  the  Qur’an,  are  “A 
confused  medley  of  dreams”(12:44)  and  not  worth  interpreting.  If  they  have  any 
meaning, it is of no importance. Either due to some ailment, the  

                                                 
4 Bukhari, Ta’bir, 2, 4, 10, 26; Muslim, Ru’ya, 6-9; Abu Da’ud, Adab, 88; Tirmidhi, Ru’ya, 1, 2, 6, 10; 
Ibn Maja, Ru’ya, 1, 3, 6, 9; Darimi, Ru’ya, 2; Muwatta’, Ru’ya, 1, 3; Musnad, ii, 18, 50, 219; iv, 10-
13; v, 316, 319. 
5 Muslim, Ru’ya&, 6; Abu Da’ud, Adab, 88; Tirmidhi, Ru’ya, 6; Musnad, ii, 269. 

 

401

power of imagination mixes things up and depicts them accordingly; or it recalls some 
stimulating event that  happened to the person that day, or previously, or even at the 
same time a year or two earlier, and it modifies and reproduces it in some other form. 
These are both “A confused medley of dreams,” and not worth interpreting. 

The  third  sort  is  true  dreams.  When  the  senses  that  bind  man  to  the  Manifest 
World  and  roam  in  it  rest  and  cease  their  activity,  the  dominical  subtle  faculty  in 
man’s  make-up  forms  a  direct  relation  with  World  of  the  Unseen  and  opens  up  a 
window  onto  it.  Through  the  window,  it  looks  on  events  that  are  in  preparation;  it 
comes face to face with the manifestations of the Preserved Tablet and some samples 
of the missives of divine determining;  it beholds  some true occurrences. Sometimes 
the imagination governs in such dreams, dressing them in the garments of form. There 
are numerous types and levels of this sort of dream. Sometimes they turn out exactly 
as  dreamed;  sometimes  they  turn  out  slightly  obscured,  as  though  under  a  fine  veil; 
and sometimes they turn out heavily veiled. 

It  is  narrated  in  Hadiths  that  the  dreams  God’s  Most  Noble  Messenger  (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace) had at the outset of the revelations turned out as true 
and clear as the breaking of morning.6 

The Fifth 

True  dreams  are  a  higher  development  of  premonitions.  Everyone  has 
premonitions  to  a  greater  or  lesser  degree.  Animals  even  have  them.  At  one  time  I 
discovered  two  senses  including  premonition  scientifically,  additional  to  the  well-
known external and inner senses such as the unconscious instinctive senses that impel 
and  stimulate,  and  hearing  and  sight.  Philosophers  and  the  people  of  misguidance 
mistakenly and foolishly call those little known senses “natural instinct.” God forbid! 
They are not “natural” instinct; divine determining impels human beings and animals 
through a sort of innate inspiration. For example, if some animals like cats lose their 
sight, through this impulse of divine determining, they go and find a plant that heals 
their eyes and rub it on them, and they get better. 

Also, birds of prey  like eagles, which, similarly to the public  health officials of 
the earth are charged with the duty of removing the carcasses of nomadic animals, are 
informed through that impulse of divine determining, that inspiration of the sense of 
premonition, that divine drive, of animal remains a day’s distance away, and they go 
and find them. 

                                                 
6 Bukhari, Badi’ al-Wahy, 3; Tafsir Sura, 96:1; Ta’bir, 1; Muslim, Iman, 252; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; 
Musnad, vi, 153, 232. 

 

402

Also, a young bee newly come into the world, flies a day’s distance when only a 
day  old  without  losing  its  way,  and  through  that  drive  of  divine  determining  and 
inspiring impulse, returns to its hive.  

Also, it happens frequently to everyone that while speaking of someone, the door 
opens  and  totally  unexpectedly  the  same  person  enters.  There  is  even  a  saying  in 
Kurdish which goes: “Talk of the wolf and ready your gun, for it’s bound to appear.” 
That  is  to  say,  through  a  premonition,  that  dominical  subtle  faculty  perceives  the 
person’s  arrival  in  summary  fashion.  But  since  the  conscious  mind  does  not 
comprehend  it,  it  prompts  him  to  speak  of  it,  not  intentionally  but  involuntarily. 
Intuitive people sometimes say that someone is coming, almost miraculously. At one 
time  I  myself,  even,  was  acutely  sensitive  in  this  way.  I  wanted  to  incorporate  the 
condition  into  a  principle,  but  was  unable  to  adapt  it  and  couldn’t.  However,  in 
righteous people, and particularly the people of sainthood, premonition develops to a 
high degree, showing its effects wondrously. 

Thus, ordinary people even may manifest a sort of sainthood by virtue of which 
in true dreams, they dream of things appertaining to the Unseen and the future like the 
saints.  Yes,  for  ordinary  people,  in  respect  of  true  dreams  sleep  may  resemble  a 
degree of sainthood. So too, it is for everyone a splendid dominical cinema. However, 
those  with  good  morals  think  good  thoughts,  and  someone  who  has  good  thoughts 
dreams  of  good  things.  But  since  those  with  bad  morals  think  bad  thoughts,  they 
dream  of  bad  things.  Furthermore,  for  everyone,  true  dreams  are  windows  in  the 
Manifest  World  that  look  onto  the  World  of  the  Unseen.  For  restricted,  ephemeral 
human  beings,  they  are  also  an  arena  of  infinite  proportions  manifesting  a  sort  of 
eternity,  and  a  place  for  gazing  on  the  past  and  the  future  as  though  they  were  the 
present.  They  are  also  a  resting-place  for  beings  with  spirits,  crushed  as  they  are 
beneath  the  responsibilities  of  life  and  who  suffer  great  hardship.  It  is  for  reasons 
similar to these that with  verses  like: “And We  made your sleep for rest,”(78:9) the 
All-Wise Qur’an teaches about sleep (hakikat-i nevmiye), giving it importance. 

The Sixth and Most Important 

 Having  experienced  them  numerous  times,  true  dreams  have  become  for  me 
decisive  proofs  at  the  degree  of  absolute  certainty  (hakkalyakîn)  that  divine 
determining encompasses all things. Especially the last few years, these dreams have 
reached  such  a  degree  that  they  have  made  me  certain  that  the  most  insignificant 
events and unimportant dealings and even the most commonplace conversations I will 
have  the  following  day  are  written  and  ordained  before  they  occur,  and  that  by 
dreaming of them the night before, I have read them not with my tongue but with my 
eyes. Not once,  

 

403

not  a  hundred  times,  but  perhaps  a  thousand  times,  the  things  I  have  said  in  my 
dreams or the people I have dreamt of at night, although I had not thought of them at 
all,  have  turned  out  exactly  or  with  little  interpretation  the  following  day.  It  means 
that the most trivial things are both recorded and written before they happen. That is 
to say, there  is  no chance or coincidence, events  do not occur haphazardly, they are 
not without order. 

The Seventh 

Your beautiful, blessed, and auspicious dream was very good for the Qur’an and 
for us. Also, time has interpreted it and is interpreting it; there is no need for me to do 
so.  Its  partial  interpretation  also  turned  out  well.  If  you  study  it  carefully,  you  will 
understand. I shall point out only one or two aspects. That  is, I  shall explain a truth 
(hakikat).  The  visions  you  have  had,  which  are  like  the  true  meanings  (hakikat)  of 
dreams, are the representations of those true meanings. It is like this:  

That vast field was the world of Islam. The mosque at its end was the province of 
Isparta. The muddy water around it was the swamp of the dissoluteness, idleness, and 
innovations of the present time. Your swiftly reaching the mosque safely and without 
being contaminated by the mud was a sign that  you took up the lights of the Qur’an 
before  everyone  else,  and  had  remained  unspoilt  with  your  heart  uncorrupted.  The 
small congregation in the mosque consisted of some of the people who have taken the 
Words upon themselves, like Hakkı, Hulûsi, Sabri, Süleyman, Rüştü, Bekir, Mustafa, 
Ali, Zühtü, Lûtfi, Husrev, and Re’fet. As for the small platform, it was a small village 
like  Barla.  The  loud  voice  was  an  allusion  to  the  power  and  rapid  spread  of  the 
Words.  The  place  assigned  to  you  in  the  first  row,  was  that  vacated  for  you  by 
Abdurrahman.  The  indication  and  fact  that  the  congregation,  as  though  wireless 
receivers, wanted to make the whole world hear its teachings, will turn out at a later 
date, God willing. If the people now are like small seeds, with divine assistance, in the 
future they will all be like tall trees and telegraph offices. As for the turbanned youth, 
he  is  someone  who  will  work  together  with  Hulûsi,  or  even  surpass  him;  he  is 
destined to become one of the students and those who disseminate the Words. I can 
think  of  some  of  them,  but  I  cannot  say  definitely.  The  youth  is  someone  who will 
come  into  prominence  through  the  power  of  sainthood.  You  can  interpret  the 
remaining points instead of me. 

Speaking with friends like you is both agreeable and acceptable, so I have spoken 
at length about this brief matter, and perhaps I have been prodigal. But since I began 
with the intention of showing a way of expounding the Qur’an’s verses about sleep, 
God willing, my prodigality will be forgiven, or not be prodigality even. 

 

404

The Second Part, 
which is the Second Matter 

 [This  was  written  to  put  a  stop  to  and  solve  a  significant  argument 
about the Hadith  which describes  how Moses (Upon  whom be peace) 
struck  Azra’il  (Upon  whom  be  peace)  in  the  eye,  and  the  rest  of  the 
story.1] 

I heard a scholarly argument in Eğridir. It was wrong to hold such an argument 
especially at this time, but I did not know it was an argument. I was asked a question 
and  shown  a  Hadith  in  a  reliable  book  marked  with  a  qaf,  which  signifies  the 
agreement of the two Shaikhs [Bukhari and Muslim]. They asked me: “Is it a Hadith 
or isn’t it?” 

I  replied  that  one  should  have  confidence  in  someone  who,  in  a  reliable  book 
such as that, cites the agreement of the two Shaikhs concerning a Hadith; it means it is 
a Hadith. However, Hadiths may contain allegorical obscurities like the Qur’an, and 
only  experts  can  ascertain  their  meanings.  Even  the  literal  meaning  of  this  Hadith 
suggests that it may belong to the allegorical category of those obscure ones. If I had 
known that it was a point of argument, I would not have given such a short answer, 
and would have replied as follows: 

Firstly:  The  primary  condition  for  discussing  matters  of  this  sort  is  to  argue 
fairly, intending to discover the truth. It is permissible for those who know about the 
subject  to  discuss  it,  so  long  as  they  do  not  do  so  stubbornly  nor  give  rise  to 
misunderstanding. Evidence that such an argument is for the sake of the truth is that if 
the truth emerges through the opposite party, a person is not upset but pleased. For he 
will  have  learned  something  he  did  not  know.  If  it  had  emerged  through  him,  he 
would not have learned much and might well have become arrogant. 

Secondly:  If the argument is about a Hadith, the categories of Hadiths have to be 
known,  as  well  as  the  types  of  implicit  revelation,  and  the  varieties  of  prophetic 
speech. It is not permissible to discuss ambiguous Hadiths  

                                                 
1Bukhari, Jana’iz, 69; Anbiya’, 31; Muslim, Fada’il, 157-8; Nasa’i, Jana’iz, 121; Musnad, ii, 269, 315, 
351. 

 

405

among the ordinary people, and to show off and justify oneself like a lawyer, and to 
rely on egotism to support ones arguments rather than on truth and right. The question 
being broached and argued about is having an adverse effect on the minds of the poor 
ordinary people. They cannot comprehend obscure allegorical Hadiths like these, and 
if  they  deny  them,  it  opens  the  terrifying  door  to  their  also  denying  definite, 
unambiguous Hadiths that they cannot understand with their limited intelligences. If 
they take the  Hadith on face  value and accept the literal meaning and they spread it 
around,  it  paves  the  way  for  the  people  of  misguidance  to  object  to  it  and  call  it 
superstition. Since attention has been attracted to this allegorical Hadith unnecessarily 
and  harmfully,  and  there  are  many  Hadiths  of  this  sort,  it  is  essential  to  offer  an 
explanation that  will  remove  their doubts. Whether  or not  the  Hadith  is  certain,  the 
following fact should be mentioned. 

We  may  deem  sufficient  the  detailed  explanations  in  the  treatises  we  have 
written; that is, the twelve principles in the Third Branch of the Twenty-Fourth Word, 
and  in  the  Fourth  Branch;  and  in  one  of  the  principles  in  the  Introduction  in  the 
Nineteenth  Letter  about  the  sorts  of  revelation;  and  here  indicate  only  briefly  that 
truth. It is as follows: 

The angels are not restricted to a having single form like human beings; although 
they are individual beings, they are also universals. Azra’il (Upon whom be peace) is 
the supervisor of the angels who are charged with taking possession of the spirits of 
the dying. 

Q u e s t i o n : “Does Azra’il (UWP) himself take possession of them, or do his 

helpers do this?” 

There are three “ways” in this matter: 
The First Way: Azra’il (Upon whom be peace) takes possession of every dying 
person’s  spirit.  Nothing  is  an  obstacle  to  another,  for  he  is  luminous.  Something 
luminous  can  be  present  in  innumerable  places  by  means  innumerable  mirrors  and 
appear in them. The similitudes of luminous beings possess their characteristics; they 
may be deemed the same as them and not other than them. The sun’s image in mirrors 
displays it’s light and heat. Similarly, the images of such spirit beings as the angels in 
the  various  mirrors  of  the  World  of  Similitudes  are  the  same  as  them;  they  display 
their characteristics. But they are represented in accordance with the capacities of the 
mirrors.  The  same  instant  Gabriel  (Upon  whom  be  peace)  appeared  before  the 
Companions  in  the  form  of  Dihya,  he  appeared  in  different  forms  in  thousands  of 
places  and  was  prostrating  with  his  magnificent  wings,  which  stretch  from  east  to 
west, before the divine throne. His similitude was everywhere in accordance with the 
place’s capacity; at the same instant he was present in thousands of places. 

 

406

According to this way, for the human and particular image of the Angel of Death 
represented  in  a  human  being’s  mirror  when  he  is  taking  possession  of  his  spirit  to 
receive the blow of a resolute, angry, awe-inspiring person like Moses (Upon whom 
be peace), and for that image-form, which resembled the Angel of Death’s clothes, to 
have his eye put out, would be neither impossible, nor extraordinary, nor irrational. 

The Second Way: The archangels Gabriel, Michael, and Azra’il are like general 
supervisors. They have helpers that are similar to them in kind and resemble them, but 
are  lesser  than  them.  The  assistants  differ  according  to  the  sorts  of  creatures;  those 
who take possession of the spirits of the righteous2 are of one sort, while those who 
take possession  of  the  spirits  of  the  wicked  are  of  another,3  as  the  following  verses 
point out: 

By  the  [angels]  who tear out  [the  souls of  the  wicked]  with  violence; *  By 
those who gently draw out [the souls of the blessed].(79:1-2) 

In view of this way, it is perfectly reasonable that, because he was naturally awe-
inspiring and brave, and was an acceptable suppliant of God, Moses (Upon whom be 
peace)  should  have  dealt  a  blow  not  at  Azra’il  (Upon  whom  be  peace),  but  at  the 
wraith-like  body of one of his helpers.4 

The  Third  Way:  As  is  explained  in  the  Fourth  Principle  in  the  Twenty-Ninth 
Word  and  is  indicated  by  some  Hadiths,  there  are  some  angels  who  have  forty 
thousand heads, and in each of their heads are forty thousand tongues, (which means 
that they also have eighty thousand eyes), and with each of those tongues they utter 
forty thousand divine glorifications. Yes, since the duties the angels are charged with 
are in accordance with the sorts of beings of the Manifest World, they represent those 
species’ glorifications in the Spirit World. It is certain to be thus, for the globe of the 
earth is a creature; it glorifies Almighty God. It has not forty thousand, but perhaps a 
hundred  thousand  sorts  of  beings,  which  are  like  heads.  Each  sort  has  hundreds  of 
thousands of individual members which are like tongues;  

                                                 
2 In my native land, the Angel of Death charged with taking possession of the saints’ spirits came while 
a great saint well-known as Seyda was in the throes of death. Seyda shouted out beseeching the divine 
court: “I love students of the religious sciences, so let the angel charged with taking possession of their 
souls take possession of mine!” Those who were present testified to this incident. 
3 Nasa’i, Jana’iz, 9; Ibn Maja, Jihad, 10. 
4 In my native land, even, a very bold man saw the Angel of Death while he was in the throes of death. 
He said: “You’re seizing me while I’m lying in my bed!” And he got up, mounted his horse and 
challenged him, taking his sword in his hand. He died on horseback, like a man. 

 

407

and so on. That means the angel appointed to the earth must have not forty thousand 
heads but hundreds of thousands; and in every head must be hundreds of thousands of 
tongues; and so on.  

Thus, according to this way, Azra’il (Upon whom be peace) has a face and an eye 
that looks to each person. When Moses (Upon whom be peace) struck Azra’il (Upon 
whom be peace), it was not directed at his essential self and his true form, and it was 
not an insult, or non-acceptance; he struck, and strikes, in the eye the being who drew 
attention to his death and wanted to prevent his work, because he wanted his duties of 
prophethood to continue for ever. 

God  knows  best  what  is  right. *  None knows  the  Unseen  save  God. * Say: 
The knowledge is with God alone.   
He  it  is  Who  has  sent  down  to  you  the  Book:  in  it  are  verses  basic  or 
fundamental [of established meaning]; they are the foundation of the Book; 
others are allegorical. But those in whose hearts is perversity follow the part 
thereof  that  is  allegorical,  seeking  discord,  and  searching  for  its  hidden 
meanings, but no one knows its hidden meanings except God. And those who 
are firmly grounded in knowledge say: “We believe in the Book; the whole of 
it  is  from  our  Sustainer;”  and  none  will  grasp  the  Message  except  men  of 
understanding.(3:7) 

 

408

The Third Piece, 
which is the Third Matter 

 [This  matter  consists  of  a  private  and  particular  answer  to  a  general 
question  asked  by  most  of  my  brothers  through  the  tongue  of 
disposition, and by some of them verbally.] 

Q u e  s t i o n : You say to everyone who  visits  you: “Don’t await  any saintly 
intervention  from  me  and  don’t  think  of  my  person  as  being  blessed.  I  have  no 
spiritual  rank.  Like  a  common  soldier  may  convey  orders  coming  from  the  rank  of 
field  marshal,  I  convey  the  orders  of  just  such  a  rank.  And  like  a  bankrupt  can 
advertise  the  precious  diamonds  of  a  jeweller’s  shop,  I  announce  the  wares  of  a 
sacred,  Qur’anic  shop.”  However,  our  hearts  desire  an  effulgence  in  the  same  way 
that our minds need knowledge, and our spirits seek a light, and so on; we want many 
things  in  many  respects.  We  came  to visit  you  supposing  you  to be  the person  who 
will  meet  our  needs.  What  we  need  is  a  saint,  someone  with  saintly  influence, 
someone  of  spiritual  attainment,  rather  than  a  scholar. If the  matter  is  really  as  you 
say, then perhaps we were wrong in visiting you? They ask this through the tongue of 
disposition. 

T h e  A n s w e r : Listen to the following five points, then think about them and 

judge whether your visits are pointless or beneficial. 

First Point  

The  common  servant  and  wretched  soldier  of  a  king  gives  some  generals  and 
pashas royal gifts and decorations in the king’s name, and makes them grateful. If the 
generals  and  pashas  ask:  “Why  are  we  demeaning  ourselves  before  this  common 
soldier  and  accepting  these  gifts  and  bounties  from  him?”,  it  will  be  arrogant 
foolishness. The soldier too, if, outside his duty, he does not stand up before the field 
marshal and recognize him as superior to himself, it will be stupid folly. If one of the 
grateful  generals  thankfully  condescends  to  visit  the  soldier’s  humble  dwelling,  the 
king, who sees and knows of the situation, will send dishes from the royal kitchen for 
his loyal servant’s eminent guest, so the soldier will not be ashamed at having nothing 
to offer but dry bread. 

 

409

Similarly,  however  lowly  he  may  be,  a  loyal  servant  of  the  All-Wise  Qur’an 
conveys  its  commands  unhesitatingly  and  in  its  name  to  even  the  loftiest  of people. 
With  pride  and  independence,  not  abasing  himself or begging, he  sells  the Qur’an’s 
precious diamonds to those who are rich in spirit. However lofty they are, they should 
not behave  arrogantly towards the common servant while he is carrying out his duty. 
And  if they  apply  to  the  servant,  it  should  not  make  him  proud  either,  or  get  above 
himself. If some of the customers for the sacred treasure regard the wretched servant 
as a saint and look on him as exalted, certainly it is the mark of the Qur’anic truth’s 
sacred  compassion  to  send  them  assistance,  succour,  and  enlightenment  from  the 
divine treasury, without the servant being aware of it or intervening, so that he should 
not be ashamed. 

Second Point 

Imam-i  Rabbani,  the  Regenerator  of  the  Second  Millennium,  Ahmad  Faruqi 
(May God be pleased with him), said: “In my opinion, the unfolding and clarification 
of  a  single  of  the  truths  of  belief  is  preferable  to  thousands  of  illuminations  and 
instances of wonder-working. Moreover, the aim  and result of all the Sufi paths are 
the unfolding and clarification of the truths of faith.” Since a champion of Sufism like 
Imam-i Rabbani made such a pronouncement, surely the Words, which expound the 
truths of faith with perfect clarity and proceed from the mysteries of the Qur’an, may 
yield the results sought from sainthood. 

Third Point 

Thirty  years ago dreadful blows descended on the heedless head of the Old Said 
and he pondered over the assertion “Death is a reality.” He saw  himself in a muddy 
swamp. He sought  help, searched for a way, tried to find a saviour. He saw that the 
ways were many; he was hesitant. He took an omen from the book Futuh al-Ghayb of 
Gawth  al-A‘zam,  Shaikh  Gilani (May  God be pleased  with  him).  It  opened  at  these 
lines: “You are in the Dar al-Hikma, so find a doctor who will heal your heart.” It is 
strange,  but  at  that  time  I  was  a  member of  the  Darü’l-Hikmeti’l-Islamiye.  I  was  as 
though a doctor trying to heal the wounds of the people of Islam, but was sicker than 
they. A sick person should look firstly to himself, then to others. 

The Shaikh was saying to me: “You yourself are sick; find a doctor for yourself.” 
So I said: “You be my doctor!” I took him as my doctor and read the book as though 
it were address 

 

410

ing  me.  But  it  was  most  severe.  It  smashed  my  pride  in  truly  fearsome  manner.  It 
carried out drastic surgery on my soul. I could not stand it. I read half of it as though it 
were addressing me, but did not have the strength and endurance to finish it. I put the 
book back on the shelf. Then a week later the pain of that curative operation subsided 
and  I  felt  pleasure  instead.  I  again  opened  the  book  and  read  it  right  through;  I 
benefited  a  lot  from  it,  that  book  of  my  first  master.  I  listened  to  his  prayers  and 
supplications, and profited abundantly. 

Then  I  saw  Maktubat  (Letters)  of  Imam-i  Rabbani  and  took  it  up.  I  opened  it 
purely  to  take  an  omen.  It  is  strange,  but  in  the  whole  of  Maktubat  the  word 
Bediuzzaman appears only twice and those two letters fell open for me at once. I saw 
that written at the head of them was: “Letter to Mirza Bediuzzaman,” and my father’s 
name was Mirza. “Glory be to God!” I exclaimed, “these letters are addressing me.” 
At that time the Old Said was also known as Bediuzzaman. Apart from Bediuzzaman 
Hamadani, I  knew  of  no  one  in  the  last three  hundred  years  famous  with  the  name. 
Whereas  in  the  Imam’s  time  there  was  such  a  person  and  he  wrote  him  these  two 
letters.  His  condition  must  have  been  similar  to  mine,  for  I  found  that  these  letters 
were the cure for my ills. Only, the  Imam persistently recommended in many of  his 
letters what he wrote in these two, which was: “Make  your qibla one.” That is, take 
one person as your master and follow him; do not concern yourself with anyone else. 

This most important recommendation did not seem fitting for my disposition and 
mental  state.  However  much  I  pondered  over  which  of  them  to  follow,  I  remained 
perplexed  and  confused. They  all  had  different  qualities  that  drew  me;  one  was  not 
enough.  While  thus bewildered,  it  was  imparted  to  my  heart  by  God’s  mercy:  “The 
All-Wise Qur’an is the head of these various ways and the source of these streams and 
the sun of these planets; the true single qibla is to be found in it. In which case, it is 
also  the  most  elevated  guide  and  holy  master.”  So  I  clasped  it  with  both  hands  and 
clung on to it. Of course with my deficient, wretched abilities I could not absorb the 
effulgence – like the water of life – of that true guide as was its due, but still, through 
it,  we can  show  that  effulgence,  that  water  of  life,  according  to  the  degree  of  those 
who receive it, those who perceive the truth through their hearts and attain to certain 
spiritual  states.  That  is  to  say,  the  Words  and  those  lights,  which  proceed  from  the 
Qur’an,  are not  only  scholarly  matters  that  address  the  intellect,  they  are  matters  of 
faith  that  look  to  the  heart,  the  spirit,  and  spiritual  states.  They  resemble  most 
elevated, valuable knowledge of God. 

Fourth Point 

All the subtle inner faculties of those of the Companions and of the following two 
generations who possessed the very  highest degree of the greater sainthood received 
their share from the Qur’an itself, and for them,  

 

411

the Qur’an was a true guide and sufficient for them. This shows that just as the All-
Wise Qur’an states realities, so it emanates the effulgences of the greater sainthood to 
those capable of receiving them. 

Yes, there are two ways of passing from the apparent to reality: 
One  is  to  enter  the  intermediate  realm  of  Sufism,  and  to  reach  reality  by 

traversing the degrees through spiritual journeying. 

The  Second  Way  is,  through  divine  favour,  to  pass  directly  to  reality  without 
entering  the  intermediate  realm  of  the  Sufi  way.  This  is  the  elevated,  direct  way 
particular to the Companions and those who succeeded them.  

That  is  to  say,  the  lights  which  issue  from  the  truths  of  the  Qur’an,  and  the 
Words, which interpret those lights, may possess those characteristics, and do possess 
them. 

Fifth Point 

We shall demonstrate through five small examples that the Words both instruct in 

the realities, and perform the duty of guide. 

F  i  r  s  t    E  x  a  m  p  l  e  :  I  myself  have  formed  the  conviction  through 
experiencing, not ten or a hundred times but thousands of times, that just as the lights 
proceeding from the Words and the Qur’an  give  instruction to my mind, so do they 
induce a state of belief in my heart and produce the pleasure of belief in my spirit, and 
so on. The same goes for worldly matters: just as the follower of a wonder-working 
shaikh awaits saintly assistance from him to answer his needs; so I have awaited from 
the wondrous mysteries of the All-Wise Qur’an that they answer my needs, and this 
has  been  achieved  for  me  on  numerous  occasions  in  ways  I  had  not  hoped  or 
anticipated. The following are only two minor examples: 

The First: As is described in detail in the Sixteenth Letter, a large loaf of bread 
appeared in an extraordinary way to a guest of mine called Süleyman, at the top of a 
cedar tree. For two days the two of us fed off that gift from the Unseen. 

The Second Example: I shall recount a very insignificant yet gratifying incident 

that occurred recently. It was this: 

Before dawn the thought came to me that some things had been said about me in 
a way that would cast suspicion into a certain person’s heart. I said to myself: “If only 
I  had  seen  him  and  had  dispelled  the  disquiet  from  his  heart.”  At  that  moment,  I 
needed part of one of my books which had been sent to Nis, and I said to myself: “If 
only I had got it back.” Then after the morning prayer I sat down and lo and behold!, 
that same person entered the room with that very part of the book in his hand. I said to 
him: “What is  

 

412

it you are holding?” He answered: “I don’t know. Someone gave it to me outside my 
house saying that it had come from Nis; so I brought it to you.” “Glory be to God!” I 
exclaimed, “it does not look like chance this man coming from his house at this time 
of day and this part of the Words arriving from Nis.” And thinking: “It was surely the 
All-Wise Qur’an’s saintly influence that gave a man such as this a piece of paper such 
as  that  at  the  same  moment  and  sent  it  to  me,”  I  exclaimed:  “All  praise  be  to  God! 
One  who  knows  the  smallest,  most  secret,  least  significant  desire  of  my  heart,  will 
certainly  have  compassion  on  me  and  protect  me;  in  which  case,  I  owe  the  world 
nothing whatsoever!” 

S e c o n d  E x a m p l e : My nephew, the late Abdurrahman, had a much higher 
opinion of me personally than was my due, despite his  having parted from me eight 
years  previously  and  having  been  tainted  by  the  heedlessness  and  worries  of  the 
world. He wanted such help and assistance from me as I did not have and could not 
give.  But  the  All-Wise  Qur’an’s  saintly  influence  came  to  his  assistance:  the  Tenth 
Word about the resurrection of the dead came into his possession three months before 
his  death.  It  cleansed  him  of  his  spiritual  dirt  and  doubts  and  heedlessness.  Quite 
simply  as  though  he  had  risen  to  the  degree  of  sainthood,  he  displayed  three  clear 
instances of wonder-working  in the letter he wrote me before he died. It is  included 
among the pieces of the Twenty-Seventh Letter and may be referred to. 

T h i r d  E x a m p l e : I had a brother of the hereafter and student who was one 
of those who approach reality with their hearts, called Hasan Efendi from Burdur. He 
had  an  excessively  good  opinion  of  me,  far  better  than  I  deserved,  and  expected 
assistance from my wretched person as though awaiting the grace and influence of a 
great saint. Suddenly, in completely unrelated fashion, I gave the Thirty-Second Word 
to someone to study who lived in one of the villages of Burdur. Later I remembered 
Hasan Efendi  and I said: “If  you  go to Burdur, give  it to Hasan Efendi, and let him 
peruse it for five or six days.” The man went and gave it to him straight away. It was 
only a month of so till Hasan Efendi died. He cast himself on the Thirty-Second Word 
just like a man suffering a terrible thirst casts himself on the sweet water of Kawthar 
if  he  happens  upon  it.  He  studied  it  continuously  and  received  its  effulgence, 
especially the discussion on the love of God in the Third Stopping-Place, till he was 
completely cured of his ills. He found in it the enlightenment he would have expected 
from the greatest spiritual pole. He went to the mosque in good health, performed the 
prayer, and there surrendered his spirit to the Most Merciful (May God have mercy on 
him).  

 

413

F o u r t h  E x a m p l e : As is testified to by Hulûsi Bey’s piece in the Twenty-
Seventh Letter, he found in the light-filled Words, which interpret the mysteries of the 
Qur’an, assistance and succour, effulgence and light greater than in the Naqshi way, 
which is the most important and influential Sufi order. 

F i f t h  E x a m p l e : My brother Abdülmecid suffered terribly at the death of 
Abdurrahman  (May  God  have  mercy  on  him)  and at other  grievous  events.  He  also 
awaited  from  me  assistance  and  influence  I  was  unable  to  give.  I  was  not 
corresponding  with  him. Suddenly  I  sent  him  some  of  the  main  parts  of  the  Words. 
After studying them, he wrote to me and said: “Praise be to God, I have been saved! I 
would have gone mad. Each of those Words has become like a spiritual guide for me. 
I had parted from one guide, but I suddenly  found lots of them all at once, and was 
saved!” I realized that truly Abdülmecid had embarked on a good way and had been 
saved from his previous difficulties. 

There are numerous examples  like these  five which show that  if the sciences of 
belief are experienced directly as cures from the mysteries of the All-Wise Qur’an in 
consequence of need and as healing for wounds, those sciences and spiritual cures are 
sufficient  for  those  who  perceive  their  need  and  make  use  of  them  with  earnest 
sincerity. Whatever the chemist and herald is like who sells and announces them – be 
he commonplace, or bankrupt, or rich, or a person of rank, or a servant – it does not 
make much difference. There is no need to have recourse to candlelight while the sun 
shines.  Since  I  am  showing  the  sun,  it  is  meaningless  and  unnecessary  to  seek 
candlelight from me, especially since I have none. Others should rather assist me with 
prayers, spiritual assistance, and even saintly influence. It is my right to seek help and 
assistance from them, while it is incumbent on them to be content with the effulgence 
they receive from the lights of the Risale-i Nur. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise!(2:32) 
O  God,  grant  blessings  to  our  master  Muhammad  that  will  be  pleasing  to 
You and fulfilment of his truth, and to his Family and Companions, and grant 
them peace. 

  

 

414

[A short, private letter that may be added as a supplement to the Third 
Matter of the Twenty-Eighth Letter.] 

My  Brothers  of  the  Hereafter  and  Hard-Working  Students,  Husrev  Efendi  and 

Re’fet Bey! 

We  perceived  three  instances  of  Qur’anic  wonder-working  in  the  lights  of  the 
Qur’an  known  as  the  Words.  Now  through  your  effort  and  enthusiasm,  you  have 
caused a fourth to be added. The three I know are these: 

T  h  e    F  i  r  s  t  is  the  extraordinary  ease  and  speed  in  their  writing.  The 
Nineteenth  Letter  was  written  in  two  or  three  days  working  for  three  or  four  hours 
each  day  making a  total  of  twelve  hours,  without  any  other  book, in  the  mountains 
and orchards. The Thirtieth Word was written in five or six hours at a time of illness. 
The Twenty-Eighth Word, the discussion on Paradise, was written in one or two hours 
in  Süleyman’s  garden  in  the  valley.  Tevfik,  Süleyman  and  I  were  astonished  at  this 
speed. And so on. And just as there is this wonder of the Qur’an in their composition 
… 

T h e  S e c o n d,  …  so too in their being written out and copied there  is an 
extraordinary facility, enthusiasm, and lack of boredom. One of these Words appears, 
and  suddenly,  although  there  are  many  things  at  this  time  to  weary  the  mind  and 
spirit, people in many places start to write it out with total enthusiasm. They prefer it 
to anything else despite other pressing occupations. And so on. 

T h e  T h i r d  Q u r ’ a n i c  W o n d e r :  The reading of the Words does not 
cause  boredom  either.  Especially  when  one  feels  the  need  for  them;  the  more  one 
reads them, the more pleasure one receives, feeling no weariness. 

Now you have proved a fourth Qur’anic wonder. A brother like Husrev who was 
lazy and although for five  years  he  had heard about the Words, did not start writing 
them  seriously,  in  one  month  wrote  out  fourteen  books  beautifully  and  carefully, 
which  was  doubtless  the  fourth  wonder  of  the  Qur’an’s  mysteries.  He  perfectly 
appreciated  the  value  of  the  Thirty-Three  Windows  in  particular,  the  Thirty-Third 
Letter,  since  it  was  written  out  most  beautifully  and  carefully.  Yes,  it  is  a  most 
powerful, brilliant piece for gaining knowledge of God and belief  in God. Only, the 
first Windows are very concise and abbreviated, while the subsequent ones gradually 
unfold and shine more brilliantly. Contrarily to other writings, most of the Words start 
off concisely and gradually expand and illuminate. 

 

415

The Fourth Matter, 
which is the Fourth Part 

In His Name! 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44) 

 [The  answer  written  for  my  brothers  to  a  question  about  a  minor, 
though alerting, incident.] 

Y o u  a s k : On the arrival of a blessed guest, your mosque was raided on the 

night before Friday. What really happened? Why did they bother you? 

T h e  A n s w e r : I shall explain four points, necessarily in the tongue of the Old 
Said. Perhaps it  will be the means of alerting my brothers, and  you too will receive 
your answer. 

First Point 

In reality the incident was a satanic plot and an act of aggression carried out by 
dissemblers on account of atheism in a way that was a violation of the law and purely 
arbitrary,  in  order  to  alarm  us  on  the  eve  of  Friday,  destroy  the  congregation’s 
enthusiasm, and prevent me  from meeting  with people. It was  strange, but that day, 
that  is,  Thursday,  I  had  gone  somewhere  to  take  some  air.  When  returning,  a  long 
black  snake  that  looked  like  two  snakes  joined together  appeared  from  my  left,  and 
passed between me and the friend who was with me. Meaning to ask my friend if he 
had been terrified at the snake, I asked him: “Did you see it?” 

He replied: “What?” 
I said: “That terrible snake.” 
He said: “No, I didn’t see it and I can’t see it.” 
“Glory be to God!”, I exclaimed, “Such a huge snake passes between us and you 

didn’t see it! How is that?” 

At the time nothing occurred to me. Then later this was imparted to my heart: “It 
was a sign for you. Watch out!” I thought it was like one of the snakes I used to see at 
night. That is, whenever an official visited me with a malicious intention, I would see 
him in the form of a snake. In fact, one  

 

416

time I said to the District Officer: “Whenever you come intending evil, I see you as a 
snake. Be careful!” I saw his predecessor many times like that. It means that the snake 
I  saw  clearly  was  a  sign  that  their  treachery  would  not  only  remain  intentional  but 
would  take  the  form  of  actual  aggression.  For  sure,  this  time  their  aggression  was 
apparently  minor  and  they  wanted  to  minimize  it,  but  encouraged  and  joined  by  an 
unscrupulous teacher, the District Officer ordered the gendarmes: “Bring the visitors 
here!”  We  were  reciting  the  tesbihat  following  the  prayers  in  the  mosque.  Anyway 
their intention was to make me angry so that I would react in the vein of the Old Said 
and  drive  them  out  in  the  face  of  such  unlawful,  purely arbitrary  treatment.  But the 
wretch  did  not  know  that  Said  would  not  defend  himself  with  the  broken  piece  of 
wood in his hand while on his tongue he had a diamond sword from the workbench of 
the Qur’an, indeed, he would have used the sword like that. But the gendarmes were 
sensible,  and  since  no  state,  no  government  at  all,  disturbs  people  in  the  mosque 
during prayer while performing their religious duties, they waited till the prayers and 
tesbihat  were  finished.  The  Officer  was  angry  at  this  and  sent  the  rural  watchman 
after them saying: “The gendarmes don’t pay any attention to me.” But Almighty God 
did not force me to struggle with them. 

So  I  make  this  recommendation  to  my brothers:  so  long  as  there  is  no  absolute 
necessity,  don’t bother  yourselves  with  them.  In  keeping  with  the saying:  “The  best 
answer for the stupid is silence,” do not stoop to speak with them. But watch out, for 
like  showing  weakness  before  a  savage  animal  emboldens  its  attack,  to  show 
weakness  by  being  sycophantic  towards  those  with  the  consciences  of  beasts, 
encourages  them  to  be  aggressive.  Friends  must  be  alert  so  that  the  supporters  of 
atheism do not take advantage of other friends’ indifference and heedlessness. 

Second Point 

The verse: 

And  incline  not  towards  those  who  do  wrong,  or  the  Fire  will  seize 
you,(11:113) 

threatens in awesome and severe fashion not only those who support and are the tools 
of  tyranny,  but  also  those  who  have  the  slightest  inclination  towards  it.  For  like 
consenting  to  unbelief  is  unbelief,  so  is  consenting  to  tyranny  and  wrongdoing, 
tyranny and wrong. 

One of the people of attainment perfectly interpreted as follows one of the many 

jewels of the above verse: 

One who assists tyranny is the world’s most despicable being;  
He is a dog, who receives pleasure from serving the unjust. 

 

417

Yes,  some  of  them  are  snakes,  some  are  dogs.  The  one  who  spied  on  us  on  that 
blessed  night  when,  with  a  blessed  guest  we  were  reciting  blessed  prayers,  and 
informed  on  us  as  though  we  were  commiting  some  crime,  and raided  us,  certainly 
deserves the blow dealt by the above poem. 

Third Point 

Q  u  e  s  t  i  o  n  :  Since  you  rely  on  the  Qur’an’s  saintly  influence  and  its 
effulgence  and light to reform and  guide the most obstinate of the  godless, and  you 
actually  do  this,  why  do  you  not  call  to  religion  those  aggressive  people  that  are 
around you, and guide them? 

T  h  e   A  n  s  w  e  r  :  An  important  principle  of  the  Shari‘a  is  “The  person  who 
knowingly consents to harm should not be condoned.” Relying on the strength of the 
Qur’an, I say that on condition even the most obdurate irreligious person is not utterly 
vile and does not enjoy spreading the poison of misguidance like a snake, if I do not 
convince him in a few hours, I am ready to try. However, to speak of truth and reality 
to  a  conscience  that  has  fallen  to  the  very  lowest  degree  of  baseness,  to  snakes  in 
human  form  that  have  reached  such  a degree  of  hypocrisy  that  they  knowingly  sell 
religion  for  the  world  and  knowingly exchange  the  diamonds  of  reality  for  vile  and 
harmful fragments of glass, would be disrespectful towards those truths. It would be 
like  the  proverb  “Casting  pearls  before  swine.”  For  those  who do  these  things  have 
several times heard the truth from the Risale-i Nur, and they knowingly try to refute 
its  truths  before  the  misguidance  of  atheism.  Such  people  receive  pleasure  from 
poison, like snakes. 

Fourth Point 

The  treatment  I  have  received  this  seven  years  has  been  purely  arbitrary  and 
outside the  law. For the laws concerning exiles and captives and those  in prison are 
clear.  By  law,  they  can  meet  with  their  relatives  and  they  should  not  be  prevented 
from mixing with people. In every country, with every people, worship and prayer are 
immune  from  interference.  Others  like  me  stayed  together  with  their  friends  and 
relations  in  towns.  They  were  prevented  neither  from  mixing  with  others,  nor  from 
communicating, nor from moving about freely. I was prevented. And my mosque and 
my worship even were raided. And while it is Sunna according to the Shafi‘i School 
to repeat the words, “There is no god but God” in the prayers following the prescribed 
prayers, they tried to make me give them up. Even, one of the old exiles in Burdur, an 
illiterate  called  Şebab,  and  his  mother-in-law,  came  here  for  a  change  of  air.  They 
visited  me  because  we  come  from  the  same  place.  They  were  summoned  from  the 
mosque by three armed gendarmes. The official then tried to hide that he had made a  

 

418

mistake  and  acted  unlawfully,  and  apologized,  saying:  “Don’t  be  angry,  it  was  my 
duty.”  Then  he  gave  them  permission  and  told  them  to  go.  Comparing  other  things 
and treatment with that incident, it is understood that the treatment accorded to me is 
purely arbitrary, and that they inflict vipers and curs on me. But I don’t condescend to 
bother with them. I refer it to Almighty God to ward off their evil. In fact, those who 
instigated the event that was the cause of the exile are now back in their own lands, 
and  powerful  chiefs  are  back  at  the  heads  of  their  tribes.  Everyone  has  been 
discharged.  They  made  me  and  two  other  people  exceptions,  although  I  have  no 
connection  with  their  world;  may  it  be  the  end  of  them!  But  one  of  those  two  was 
appointed  Mufti  somewhere  and  can  travel  everywhere  outside  his  own  region, 
including to Ankara. And the other was left in Istanbul in the midst of forty thousand 
people from his  native region, and he can meet with everyone. Moreover, those two 
persons are not alone and with no one, like me; they are very influential, with God’s 
permission. And so on and so forth. But they put me in a village and set those with the 
least conscience on me. I have only been able to go to another village twenty minutes 
away  twice  in  six  years, and  they  did  not  give  me  permission  to go  there  for  a  few 
days’  change of  air,  crushing  me  even  more under  their  tyranny.  Whereas  whatever 
form a government takes the  law is the  same  for all. There cannot be different  laws 
for  villages  and  for  different  individuals.  That  is  to  say,  the  law  as  far  as  I  am 
concerned  is  unlawfulness.  The  officials  here  utilize  government  influence  for  their 
own personal  grudges. But I offer a hundred thousand thanks to Almighty God, and 
by way of making known His bounties, I say this: 

All  this  oppression  and  tyranny  of  theirs  is  like  pieces  of  wood  for  the  fire  of 
ardour and endeavour which illuminates the lights of the Qur’an; it makes them flare 
up and shine. And those lights of the Qur’an, which have suffered this persecution of 
theirs and have spread with the heat of endeavour, have made this province, indeed, 
most of the country, into a medrese in place of Barla. They supposed me to a prisoner 
in a  village. On the contrary,  in spite of the  atheists, Barla  has become the teaching 
desk, and many places, like Isparta, have become the medrese. 

All praise be to God, this is a bounty from my Lord and Sustainer. 

 

419

The Fifth Matter, 
which is the Fifth Part 

On Thanks 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise. 

Will they not then give thanks?(36:35, 73) * Will they not then give thanks? * 
And  we  shall  surely  reward  those  who  give  thanks.(3:145)  *  If  you  give 
thanks, I shall increase [my favours] to you.(14:7) * Worship God and be of 
those who give thanks.(39:66) 

By repeating verses  like these, the  Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition  shows that 
thanks is what the Most Merciful Creator wants most from His servants. The Qur’an, 
the  All-Wise  Distinguisher  between  Truth  and  Falsehood,  calls  on  men  to  offer 
thanks,  giving  it  the  greatest  importance.  It  shows  ingratitude  to  be  a  denial  of 
bounties  and  in  Sura  al-Rahman  utters  a  fearsomely  severe  threat  thirty-three  times 
with the verse, 

So which of the favours of your Sustainer do you deny?(55:13, etc.) 

It shows ingratitude to be denial and negation.  

Indeed, just as the All-Wise Qur’an shows thanks to be the result of creation; so 
the  universe,  which  is  a  mighty  Qur’an,  shows  the  most  important  result  of  the 
world’s creation to be thanks. For if the universe is observed carefully, it is seen from 
the  way  it  is  arranged  that  everything  results  in  thanks;  each  looks  to  thanks  to  an 
extent and is turned towards it. It is as though thanks is the most important fruit of the 
tree  of  creation,  and  gratitude  is  the  most  elevated  product  of  the  factory  of  the 
universe. The reason for this is as follows: 

We  see  in  the  creation  of  the  world  that  its  beings  are  arranged  as  though  in  a 
circle with life as its central point. All beings look to life, and serve life, and produce 
the necessities of life. That is to say, the One who created the universe chose life from 
it, giving it preference.  

 

420

Then  we  see  that  He  created  the  animal  kingdom  in  the  form  of  a  circle  and 
placed man at its centre. Simply,  He centred the aims  intended from animate beings 
on man,  gathering  all  living  creatures  around him  and  subjugating  them  to  him.  He 
made  them  serve  him  and  him  dominant  over  them.  That  is  to  say,  the  Glorious 
Creator chose man from among living beings, and willed and decreed this position for 
him in the world. 

Then we see that the world of man, and the animal world too, are disposed like 
circles with sustenance placed at their centre. He has made mankind and the animals 
enamoured of  sustenance,  has  subjugated them to  it,  and  made  them  serve  it.  What 
rules them is sustenance. And He has made sustenance such a vast, rich treasury that 
it embraces all  His  innumerable bounties. Even,  with the  faculty called the  sense of 
taste, He has placed on the tongue sensitive scales to the number of foods so that they 
can  recognize  the  tastes  of  the  many  varieties  of  sustenance.  That  is  to  say,  the 
strangest,  richest,  most  wonderful,  most  agreeable,  most  comprehensive,  and  most 
marvellous truth in the universe lies in sustenance. 

Now  we  see  that  just  as  everything  has  been  gathered  around  sustenance  and 
looks to it, so does sustenance in all its varieties subsist through thanks, both material 
and  immaterial  and  that  offered  by  word  and  by  state;  it  exists  through  thanks,  it 
produces thanks, its shows thanks. For appetite and desire for sustenance are a sort of 
innate  or  instinctive  thanks.  Enjoyment  and  pleasure  also  are  a  sort  of  unconscious 
thanks,  offered by  all  animals.  It  is  only  man who  changes the  nature of  that  innate 
thanks  through  misguidance  and  unbelief;  he  deviates  from  thanks  and  associates 
partners with God. 

Furthermore, the exquisitely adorned forms, the fragrant smells, the wonderfully 
delicious  tastes  in  the  bounties  that  are  sustenance  invite  thanks;  they  awake  an 
eagerness  in  animate  beings,  and  through  eagerness  urge  a  sort  of  appreciation  and 
respect,  and  prompt  thanks  of  a  sort. They  attract  the  attention  of  conscious  beings 
and engender admiration. They encourage them to respect the bounties; through this, 
they lead them to offer thanks verbally and by act, and to be grateful; they cause them 
to  experience  the  highest,  sweetest  pleasure  and  enjoyment  within  thanks.  That  is, 
they show that, as well as a brief and temporary superficial pleasure, through thanks, 
these delicious foods and bounties gain the favours of the Most Merciful One, which 
provide a permanent, true, boundless pleasure. They cause conscious beings to ponder 
over the infinite, pleasurable favours of the All-Generous Owner of the treasuries of 
mercy,  and  in  effect  to  taste  the  everlasting  delights  of  Paradise  while  still  in  this 
world. Thus, although by means of thanks sustenance becomes such a valuable,  

 

421

rich, all-embracing treasury, through ingratitude it becomes utterly valueless. 

As is explained in the Sixth Word, when the sense of taste in the tongue is turned 
towards sustenance for the sake of Almighty God, that is, when it performs its duty of 
thanks,  it  becomes  like  a  grateful  inspector  of  the  numberless  kitchens  of  divine 
mercy and a highly-esteemed supervisor full of praise. If it is turned towards it for the 
sake  of  the  soul,  that  is,  without  thinking  of  giving  thanks  to  the  One  who  has 
bestowed the sustenance, the sense of taste is demoted from being a highly-esteemed 
supervisor to the rank of a watchman of the factory of the stomach and a doorkeeper 
of  the  stable  of  the  belly.  Just  as  through  ingratitude  these  servants  of  sustenance 
descend to such a  level, so does the  nature of sustenance  and its other  servants  fall; 
they  fall  from  the  highest  rank  to  the  lowest;  they  sink  to  a  state  opposed  to  the 
Creator of the universe’s wisdom. 

The measure of thanks is contentment, frugality, and being satisfied and grateful. 
While  the  measure  of  ingratitude  is  greed,  wastefulness  and  extravagance;  it  is 
disrespect; it is eating whatever one comes across, whether lawful or unlawful. 

Like  ingratitude,  greed  causes  both  loss  and  degradation.  For  example,  it  is  as 
though  because  of  greed  that  the  blessed  ant  even  with  its  social  life  is  crushed 
underfoot.  For  although  a  few  grains  of  wheat  would  suffice  it  for  a  year,  it  is  not 
contented  with this  and  collects  thousands  if  it  can.  But  the blessed  honey-bee  flies 
overhead due to its contentment, and at a divine command bestows honey on human 
beings for them to eat. 

The  name  of  All-Merciful  –  the  greatest  name  after  the  name  of  Allah,  which 
signifies the divine essence and is the greatest name of the Most Pure and Holy One – 
looks  to  sustenance,  and  is  attained  to  through  the  thanks  provoked  by  sustenance. 
Also, the most obvious meaning of All-Merciful is Provider. 

Moreover,  there  are  different  varieties  of  thanks,  the  most  comprehensive  of 
which are the prescribed prayers. The prescribed prayers are a universal index of the 
sorts of thanks. 

Furthermore,  thanks  comprises  pure  belief  and  a  sincere  affirmation  of  God’s 
unity. For a person who eats an apple and utters, “Praise be to God!” is proclaiming 
through his thanks: “This apple is a souvenir bestowed directly by the hand of power, 
a  gift  directly  from  the  treasury  of  mercy.”  By  saying  this  and  believing  it,  he  is 
ascribing everything, particular and universal, to the hand of power. He recognizes the 
manifestation  of  mercy  in  everything.  He  announces  through  thanks,  his  true  belief 
and sincere affirmation of divine unity. 

 

422

The  heedless man  incurs serious loss through  ingratitude for bounties. We shall 

describe only one of its many aspects. It is as follows: 

If someone eats a delicious bounty and gives thanks, by virtue of his thanks the 
bounty  becomes  a  light  and  a  fruit  of  Paradise  in  the  hereafter.  If,  because  of  the 
pleasure, he thinks of it as the work of Almighty God’s favour and mercy, it yields a 
true,  lasting  delight  and  enjoyment.  He  sends  kernels  and  essences  of  its  meanings 
and immaterial substances like these to the abodes above, while the material husk-like 
residue,  that  is,  the  matter  that  has  completed  its  duty  and  now  is  unnecessary, 
becomes excreta and goes to be transformed into its original substances, that is, into 
the  elements.  If  he  fails  to  give  thanks,  the  temporary  pleasure  leaves  a  pain  and 
sorrow  at  its  passing,  and  itself  becomes  waste.  Bounty,  which  is  as  precious  as 
diamonds, is transformed into coal. Through thanks, ephemeral  sustenance produces 
enduring  pleasures,  everlasting  fruits.  While  bounty  that  is  met  with  ingratitude  is 
turned  from  the  very  best  of  forms  into  the  most  distasteful.  For  according  to  the 
heedless  person,  after  producing  a  fleeting  pleasure,  sustenance  ends  up  as  waste-
matter. 

Sustenance is indeed in a form worthy of love, and this form is to be seen through 
thanks.  However,  the  passion  of  the  misguided  and  heedless  for  sustenance  is 
animality.  You  can  make  further  comparisons  in  this  way  and  see  what  a  loss  the 
heedless and misguided suffer. 

Among animate species, man is the most needy for all the varieties of sustenance. 
Almighty God created man as a comprehensive mirror to all His names; as a miracle 
of power with the capacity to weigh up and recognize the contents of all His treasuries 
of mercy; and as His vicegerent on earth possessing the faculties to draw to the scales 
and evaluate all the subtleties of His names’ manifestations. He therefore made man 
utterly  resourceless,  rendering  him  needy  for  the  endless  varieties  of  sustenance, 
material and immaterial. Thanks is the means of raising man to “the best of forms,” 
which is the  highest position  in  accordance with  this comprehensiveness.  If  he does 
not give thanks, he falls to “the lowest of the low,” and perpetrates a great wrong. 

I n  S h o r t : Thanks is the most essential of the four fundamental principles of 
the  way  of  worship  and  winning  God’s  love,  the  highest  and  most  elevated  way. 
These four principles have been defined as follows: 

“Four things are necessary on the way of the impotent, my friend: 
“Absolute impotence, absolute poverty, absolute fervour, and absolute thanks, my 

friend.” 

O God, through Your mercy, appoint us among those who give thanks, O  

 

423

Most Merciful of the Merciful!  
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 
O God, grant blessings and peace to our master Muhammad, master of those 
who offer thanks and praise, and to all his Family and Companions. Amen. 
And the close of their cry will be, “All praise be to God, Sustainer of All the 
Worlds.”(10:10) 

The Sixth Matter, 
which is the Sixth Part 

This was included in another collection and not included here. 

*    *    * 

*    *    * 

 

424

The Seventh Matter, 
which is the Seventh Part 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Say: “In the bounty of God, and in His mercy, in that let them rejoice;” that 
is better than the [wealth] they hoard.(10:58) 

[This matter consists of seven “Signs,” but firstly, in order to recount a 
number  of  divine  bounties,  we  shall  explain  seven  “Reasons,”  which 
disclose the meanings of several divine favours.] 

First Reason: Before the Great War, or around the beginning of it, I  had a true 
vision. In it, I was under the famous mountain of A€r›, known as Mount Ararat. The 
mountain suddenly exploded with a terrible blast. Pieces the size of mountains were 
scattered all over the world. I looked and saw that in that awful situation, my mother 
was  beside  me.  I  said  to  her:  “Don’t  be  frightened.  This  is  happening  at  Almighty 
God’s  command,  and  He  is  All-Compassionate  and  All-Wise.”  Suddenly,  while  in 
that situation, I saw that a person of importance was commanding me: “Expound the 
Qur’an’s  miraculousness!”  I  awoke  and  I  understood  that  there  was  going  to  be  a 
great explosion and upheaval, and that following it the walls surrounding the Qur’an 
would be destroyed. The Qur’an would then defend itself directly. It was going to be 
attacked and its miraculousness would be its steel armour. And in a way surpassing 
his ability, someone like myself would be appointed at this time to reveal one sort of 
its miraculousness; I understood that I had been designated. 

Since the Qur’an’s miraculousness has been expounded to an extent in the Words, 
to set forth the divine favours received in our service, which are sorts of blessings and 
emanations  of  its  miraculousness,  will  surely  assist  it  and  pass  to  its  account,  and 
should therefore be set forth. 

Second  Reason:  The  All-Wise  Qur’an  is  our  guide,  master,  and  leader,  and 
shows  us  the  way  in  all  our  conduct.  So  since  it  praises  itself,  following  its 
instruction, we shall praise its commentary. 

 

425

Furthermore, since the Words that have been written are a sort of commentary on 
the  Qur’an, and  its  treatises  are  the  property of  the  Qur’an’s truths  and  its  realities; 
and since in most of its Suras, and particularly in the Alif. Lam. Ra.’s and Ha. Mim.’s, 
the All-Wise Qur’an displays itself in all its magnificence, tells of its own perfections, 
and praises itself in a way of which it is worthy; certainly we are charged with making 
known the flashes of the Qur’an’s miraculousness that are reflected in the Words, and 
the dominical favours that are a sign of that service’s acceptance. For our master does 
this and teaches us to do it. 

Third Reason: I do not say this about the Words out of modesty but in order to 
explain a truth, that the truths and perfections in the Words are not mine; they are the 
Qur’an’s  and  they  have  issued  from  the  Qur’an.  The  Tenth  Word,  for  instance, 
consists of a few droplets filtered from hundreds of verses, and the rest of the treatises 
are  all  like  that.  Since  I  know  it  is  thus  and  since  I  am  transient,  I  shall  depart,  of 
course something, a work, which is enduring should not, and must not, be tied to me. 
And since it is the custom of the people of misguidance and rebellion to refute a work 
that does not suit their purposes by refuting its author, the treatises, which are bound 
to the stars of the skies of the Qur’an, should not be bound to a rotten post like me 
who may be the object of criticism and disapproval, and may fall. Also, it is generally 
the  custom  to  search  for  the  merits  of  a  work  in  the  qualities  of  its  author,  whom 
people suppose to be the work’s source and origin. To attribute those elevated truths 
and  brilliant  jewels  to  a  bankrupt  like  me  in  keeping  with  that  custom,  and  to  my 
person,  who  could  not  produce  one  thousandth  of  them  himself,  is  a  great  injustice 
towards the truth. I am therefore compelled to proclaim that the treatises are not my 
property; they are the Qur’an’s property, and issuing from the Qur’an, they manifest 
its  virtues. Yes, the qualities of delicious bunches of grapes should not be sought  in 
their dry stalks. I resemble such a dry stalk. 

Fourth Reason: Sometimes modesty suggests ingratitude for bounties, indeed, is 
ingratitude for bounties. Then sometimes recounting bounties is a cause of pride. Both 
are  harmful.  The  only  solution  is  for  it  to  be  neither.  To  admit  to  virtues  and 
perfections, but without claiming ownership of them, is to show them to be the works 
bestowed by the True Bestower. For example, suppose someone were to dress you in 
a  robe  of  honour  embroidered  and  encrusted  with  jewels  and  you  became  very 
beautiful. The people then said to you: “What wonders God has willed! How beautiful 
you are!  How beautiful  you have become!”, but you modestly replied: “God forbid! 
Don’t say such a thing! What am I? This is nothing!” To do this would be ingratitude 
for the bounty and disrespectful towards skilful crafts 

 

426

man who had dressed you in the garment. While if you were to reply proudly: “Yes, I 
am  very  beautiful.  Surely  there  is  no  one  to  compare  with  me!”,  that  would  be 
conceited pride. 

In  consequence,  to  avoid  both  conceit  and  ingratitude  one  should  say:  “Yes,  I 
have grown beautiful. But the beauty springs from the robe, and thus indirectly from 
the one who clothed me in it; it is not mine.” 

Like this, if my voice were strong enough, I would shout out to the whole earth: 
“The Words are beautiful; they are truth, they are reality; but they are not mine. They 
are rays shining out from the truths of the Noble Qur’an.” 

In accordance with the principle of: 

I  cannot  praise  Muhammad  with  my  words,  rather  my  words  become 

praiseworthy through Muhammad, 

I say: 

I  cannot  praise  the  Qur’an  with  my  words,  rather  my  words  become 

praiseworthy through the Qur’an. 

That is to say, I did not beautify the truths of the Qur’an’s miraculousness, I could not 
show them beautifully; rather, the Qur’an’s beautiful truths made my words beautiful 
and elevated them. Since it is thus, it is acceptable to recount divine bounties and to 
make  known  in  the  name  of  the  beauty  of  the  Qur’an’s  truths,  the  beauties  of  its 
mirrors known as the Words, and the divine favours which comprise those mirrors. 

Fifth Reason: A long time ago I heard from one of the people of sainthood that 
he  had  divined  from  the  obscure  allusions  of  the  saints  of  old  –  received  from  the 
Unseen  –  that  a  light  would  appear  in  the  East  that  would  scatter  the  darkness  of 
innovation. He was certain of this. I have long awaited the coming of the light, and I 
am awaiting it. But flowers appear in the spring and the ground has to be prepared for 
such sacred flowers. I understood that with this service of ours we are preparing the 
ground  for  those  luminous  people.  So  to  proclaim  the  divine  favours  which  pertain 
not to us but to the lights called the Words should lead not to pride or conceit but to 
praise and thanks, and to recounting the divine bounties. 

Sixth  Reason:  Dominical  favours,  which  are  an  immediate  reward  for  our 
serving  the  Qur’an  by  means  of  the  Words,  and  an  encouragement,  are  a  success 
granted  by  God.  And  success  should  be  made  known.  If  they  surpass  success,  they 
become  a  divine  bestowal.  To  make  known  divine  bestowal  infers  thanks.  If  they 
surpass that too, they become wonders of the Qur’an with no interference on the part 
of our wills; we have merely manifested them. It is harmless to make known wonders 
of this sort, which  

 

427

they  become 

occur  unheralded  and  without  the  intervention  of  will.  If  they  surpass  ordinary 
wonders, 
the  Qur’an’s  miraculousness.  And  since 
miraculousness  may  be  made  known,  the  making  known  of  what  assists  the 
miraculousness passes to the account of the miraculousness and cannot be the cause 
of any pride or conceit; it should rather be the cause of praise and thanks. 

rays  of 

Seventh Reason: Eighty per cent of mankind are not investigative scholars who 
can penetrate to reality, recognize reality as reality and accept it as such. They rather 
accept matters by way of imitation, that they hear from acceptable and reliable people, 
in consequence of their good opinions of them. In fact, they look on a powerful truth 
as weak when in the possession of a weak man, while if they see a worthless matter in 
the possession of a worthy man, they deem it valuable. Because of this, in order not to 
reduce the value of the truths of faith and the Qur’an in the eyes of most people since 
they are in the hands of a weak and worthless wretch like myself, I am compelled to 
proclaim that outside our knowledge and will, someone is employing us; we are not 
aware  of  it,  but  he  is  making  us  work.  My  evidence  is  this:  outside  our  wills  and 
consciousness,  we  manifest  certain  favours  and  facilities.  In  which  case,  we  are 
compelled to shout out and proclaim those favours. 

In  consequence  of  the  above  seven  reasons,  we  shall point  out  several  signs  of 

universal dominical favours. 

FIRST SIGN   

Explained in the First Point of the Eighth Matter of the Twenty-Eighth Letter, are 
the  ‘coincidences’  (tevâfukat).  For  example,  in  the  Nineteenth  Letter,  about  the 
miracles of Muhammad (UWBP), in a copy written by a scribe who was unaware of 
this  factor,  on  sixty  pages  –  with  the  exception  of  two  –  from  the  Third  to  the 
Eighteenth  Signs,  more  than  two  hundred  instances  of  the  phrase  “God’s  Noble 
Messenger,  Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace”  look  to  each  other  corresponding 
perfectly.  Anyone  fair  who  looks  at  two  pages  would  confirm  that  they  are  not  the 
product  of  mere  chance.  If  many  instances  of  the  same  word  corresponded  to  each 
other on the same page, half would be chance and half coincidence; it would only be 
wholly coincidence if this occurred on more than one page. So if two, three, four, or 
even more instances of the phrase “God’s Noble Messenger, Upon whom be blessings 
and peace” correspond to each other perfectly on all the pages, it surely is not possible 
for  it  to be  chance.  It  shows  too  that  a  coincidence  that  eight  different  scribes have 
been unable to spoil is a powerful sign from the Unseen. Although the various degrees 
of eloquence are  

 

428

to be found in the books of the scholars of rhetoric and eloquence, the eloquence of 
the  All-Wise  Qur’an  has  risen  to  the  degree  of  miraculousness  and  it  is  in  no  one’s 
power  to reach  it. Similarly, the  ‘coincidences’  in  the  Nineteenth  Letter,  which  is  a 
mirror of the miracles of Muhammad (UWBP), and in the Twenty-Fifth Word, which 
is an interpreter of the miracles of the Qur’an, and in the various parts of the Risale-i 
Nur,  which  is  a  sort  of  commentary  on  the  Qur’an,  demonstrate  a  degree  of 
singularity  surpassing  all  other  books.  It  is  understood  from  this  that  it  is  a  sort  of 
wonder of the miraculousness of the Qur’an and the miracles of Muhammad (UWBP) 
which is manifested and represented in those mirrors. 

SECOND SIGN  

The  second  of  the  dominical  favours  pertaining  to  the  service  of  the  Qur’an  is 
this:  Almighty  God  bestowed  on  someone  like  me  who  has  difficulty  in  writing,  is 
semi-literate, alone, in exile, and barred from mixing with people, brothers as helpers 
who are strong, earnest, sincere, enterprising, and self-sacrificing, and whose pens are 
each like diamond swords. He placed on their powerful shoulders the Qur’anic duty 
that  weighed  heavily  on  my  weak  and  powerless  ones.  Out  of  His  perfect 
munificence, He lightened my load. In Hulûsi’s words, that blessed community is like 
a  collection  of  wireless  and  telegraph  receivers,  and  in  Sabri’s,  like  the  machines 
producing the electricity of the light factory. With their different  virtues and worthy 
qualities, again  in Sabri’s words, manifesting  a sort of coincidence proceeding  from 
the  Unseen,  they  spread  the  mysteries  of  the  Qur’an  and  lights  of  faith  all  around 
reflecting  each  other’s  enthusiasm,  effort,  enterprise,  and  seriousness,  making  them 
reach everywhere. At this time, that is, when the alphabet has been changed, and there 
are no printing-presses, and everyone is in  need of the lights of belief, and there are 
numerous  things  to  dispirit  a  person  and  destroy  his  enthusiasm,  their  unflagging 
service  and  sheer  fervour  and  endeavour  are  directly  a  wonder  of  the  Qur’an  and  a 
clear divine favour. Yes, just as sainthood has its wonders, so does a pure intention. 
So  does  sincerity.  Especially  serious,  sincere  solidarity  between  brothers  and 
brotherhood  purely  for  God’s  sake  –  they  produce  numerous  wonders.  In  fact,  the 
collective personality of such a community may achieve the perfection of a saint and 
manifest divine favours. 

My brothers and my friends in the service of the Qur’an! Just as it is unjust and 
wrong  to  give  all  the  glory  and  all  the  booty  to  the  sergeant  of  a  company  that 
conquers a citadel, so you should not ascribe the divine favours in the victories won 
through  the  strength  of  your  collective  personality  and  your  pens  to  an  unfortunate 
like myself! In fact, there is another  

 

429

indication  of  the  Unseen  in  such  a  blessed  community,  more  powerful  than  the 
‘coincidences’ proceeding from the Unseen and I can see it, but I may not point it out 
to everyone at large. 

THIRD SIGN  

The  fact  that  the  various  parts of  the  Risale-i  Nur  prove  the  principal  truths  of 
belief  and  the  Qur’an  in  brilliant  fashion  to  even  the  most  obdurate  person  is  a 
powerful sign  from the  Unseen and divine  favour. For among those truths are  some 
that Ibn Sina, who was considered the greatest genius, confessed his powerlessness to 
understand, saying: “Reason cannot solve these.” Whereas the Tenth Word explains 
what he could not achieve with his genius to ordinary people, or even to children. 

And  for  example,  a  learned  scholar  like  Sa‘d  al-Din  Taftazani  could only  solve 
the  mystery  of  divine  determining  and  man’s  will  in  forty  to  fifty  pages  with  the 
famous Muqaddimat-i Ithna ‘Ashar in his work Talwihat. Those same matters, which 
he  set  out  for the  elite  alone,  are  explained  completely  in  two  pages  in  the  Second 
Topic of  the  Twenty-Sixth  Word,  which  is  about  divine  determining,  in  a  way  that 
everyone can understand; if that is not a mark of divine favour, what is? 

There are also what are known as the mystery of world’s creation and the riddle 
of the universe, which have perplexed everyone and no philosophy  has been able to 
solve:  through  the  miraculousness  of  the  Qur’an  of  Mighty  Stature,  that  abstruse 
talisman  and  astonishing  riddle  are  solved  in  the  Twenty-Fourth  Letter,  and  in  the 
Allusive Point towards the end of the Twenty-Ninth Word, and in the six instances of 
wisdom  in  the  transformations  of  minute  particles  explained  in  the  Thirtieth  Word. 
They  have  disclosed  and  explained  the  mystery  of  the  astonishing  activity  in  the 
universe,  and  the riddle  of  the  universe’s  creation  and  its  end,  and  the  meaning  and 
instances of wisdom in the motion and transformations of particles; they are there for 
all to see and may be referred to. 

Furthermore, the Sixteenth and Thirty-Second Words explain with perfect clarity 
the partnerless unity of dominicality, through the mystery of divine oneness, together 
with the astonishing truths of infinite divine proximity and our infinite distance from 
God. While the exposition of the phrase “And He is Powerful over all things” in the 
Twentieth  Letter  and  its  Addendum  which  contains  three  comparisons  demonstrate 
self-evidently  that  minute  particles  and  the  planets  are  equal  in  relation  to  divine 
power,  and  that  at  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  the raising  to  life  of  all  beings  with 
spirits will be as easy for that power as the raising to life of a single soul, and that the 
intervention of any partner to God in the creation of the  

 

430

universe  is  so far from reason as to be impossible, thus disclosing a  vast mystery of 
divine unity. 

Furthermore,  although  in  the  truths  of  belief  and  the  Qur’an  there  is  such  a 
breadth  that  the  greatest  human  genius  cannot  comprehend  them,  the  fact  that  they 
appeared together with the great majority of their fine points through someone like me 
whose mind is confused, situation wretched, has no book to refer to, and who writes 
with  difficulty  and  at  speed,  is  directly  the  work  of  the  All-Wise  Qur’an’s 
miraculousness and a manifestation of dominical favour and a powerful sign from the 
Unseen. 

FOURTH SIGN  

Fifty to sixty treatises were bestowed in such a way that, being works that could 
not  be  written  through  the  efforts  and  exertions  of  great  geniuses  and  exacting 
scholars, let alone someone like me who thinks little, follows the apparent, and does 
not have the time for close study, they demonstrate that they are directly the works of 
divine favour. For in all these treatises, the most profound truths are taught by means 
of  comparisons  to  the  most  ordinary  and  uneducated  people.  Whereas  leading 
scholars  have  said  about  most  of  those  truths  that  they  cannot  be  made 
comprehensible and have not taught them to the elite, let alone to the common people. 
Thus, for these most distant truths to be taught to the most ordinary  man  in the 
closest way, with wondrous ease and clarity of expression, by someone like me who 
has  little  Turkish,  whose  words  are  obscure  and  mostly  incomprehensible,  and  for 
many  years  has  been  famous  for  complicating  the  clearest  facts  and  whose  former 
works  confirm  this  ill-fame,  is  certainly  and  without  any  doubt  a  mark  of  divine 
favour  and  cannot  be  through  his  skill;  it  is  a  manifestation  of  the  Noble  Qur’an’s 
miraculousness, and a representation and reflection of the Qur’an’s comparisons. 

FIFTH SIGN  

The  fact  that  although  generally  speaking  the  treatises  have  been  widely 
distributed,  and  classes  and  groups  of  people  from  the  loftiest  scholars  to  the 
uneducated, and from great saints from among those who approach reality with their 
hearts to the most obdurate irreligious philosphers, have seen them and studied them 
and have not criticized them, despite some of them receiving blows through them; and 
the fact that each group has benefited from them according to its degree; is directly a 
mark of dominical favour and a wonder of the Qur’an. And although treatises of that 
sort  are  written  only  after  much  study  and  research,  these  were  written  with 
extraordinary speed and at distressing times when my mind was contracted,  

 

431

confusing  my  thought  and  understanding,  which  is  a  mark  of  divine  favour  and  a 
dominical bestowal. 

Yes,  most  of  my  brothers  and  all  the  friends  who  are  with  me  and  the  scribes 
know that the five parts of the Nineteenth Letter were written referring to no book at 
all in several days working for two or three hours each day making a total of twelve 
hours; and the Fourth Part, which  is the most important and displays a clear  seal of 
prophethood  in  the  phrase  “God’s  Noble  Messenger,  Upon  whom  be  blessings  and 
peace,” was written from memory in three or four hours in the rain in the mountains; 
and that the important and profound treatise of the Thirtieth Word was written in six 
hours  in  an  orchard;  and  that  as  with  the  Twenty-Eighth  Word,  which  was  written 
finally  in  two  hours  in  Süleyman’s  garden,  most  of  them  were  written  in  such 
conditions; my close friends know also that for many years, when I suffer difficulties 
and my mind is contracted, I cannot explain even the plainest facts, indeed, I do not 
even know them. Then especially when illness aggravates the distress, It prevents me 
from  teaching  and  writing  even  more.  Yet  despite  this,  the  most  important  of  the 
Words  and  their  treatises  were  written  when  I  was  suffering  most  difficulty  and 
illness, and with the most speed. If this was not a direct divine favour and dominical 
bounty and wonder of the Qur’an, what was it? 

Furthermore,  whatever  book  it  may  be,  if  it  discusses  the  divine  truths  and 
realities of faith, it will certainly be harmful for some people, and for this reason all 
the  matters  it  contains  should  not  be  taught  to  everyone.  However,  although  I  have 
asked  many  people,  up  to  the  present  time  these  treatises  have  caused  no  harm  to 
anyone;  they  have  caused  no  ill  effects  or  unfavourable  reaction,  nor  have  they 
disturbed anyone’s mind. It absolutely certain in my opinion that this is a direct sign 
of the Unseen and dominical favour. 

SIXTH SIGN  

It  has  now  become  absolutely  clear  in  my  view  that  most  of  my  life  has  been 
directed  in such  a way,  outside  my  own  will,  ability,  comprehension,  and  foresight, 
that it might produce these treatises to serve the All-Wise Qur’an. It is as if all my life 
as a scholar had been spent in preparation and preliminaries, the result of which was 
the  exposition  of  the  Qur’an’s  miraculousness  through  the  Words.  I  have  no  doubt 
even that these seven years of exile, and the situation imposed on me whereby I have 
been isolated for no reason and against my wish, living a solitary life in a village in a 
way opposed to my temperament, and my feeling disgust at and abandoning many of 
the ties and rules of social life to which I had long grown accus 

 

432

tomed, was in order to make me carry out this duty to serve the Qur’an directly and in 
purely sincere fashion. I am of the opinion that the ill-treatment was very often visited 
on me  by  a  hand of  favour under  the  veil  of  unjust oppression,  compassionately,  in 
order to focus my thought on the mysteries of the Qur’an and restrict it and not allow 
my mind to be distracted. And being prevented from studying all other books, despite 
formerly having great desire to study, I felt an aloofness towards them in my spirit. I 
understood that I had been made to give up studying, which would have been a solace 
and  familiar  in  my  exile,  so  that  the  verses  of  the  Qur’an  should  be  my  absolute 
master directly. 

Furthermore, the great majority of the works that have been written, the treatises, 
have  been  bestowed  instantaneously  and  suddenly  in  consequence  of  some  need 
arising  from  my  spirit,  not  from  any  outside  cause.  Then  when  afterwards  I  have 
shown them to friends, they have said that they are the remedy for the wounds of the 
present  time.  And  having  been  disseminated,  I  have  understood  from  most  of  my 
brothers that they meet the needs of the times exactly and are like a cure for every ill. 
I have no doubt therefore that the above-mentioned points and the course of my 
life  and  my  involuntarily  studying  fields  of  learning  opposed  to  normal  practice, 
outside  my  own  will  and  awareness,  were  a  powerful  divine  favour  and  dominical 
bounty bestowed to yield sacred results such as these. 

SEVENTH SIGN  

In the course of our work over the past five to six years, without exaggeration we 
have  seen with  our own  eyes  a  hundred  instances  of divine  bestowal  and dominical 
favour  and  wonders  of  the  Qur’an.  We  have  pointed  out  some  of  them  in  the 
Sixteenth  Letter,  and  others  we  have  described  in  the  various  matters  of  the  Fourth 
Topic  of  the  Twenty-Sixth  Letter,  and  in  the  Third  Matter  of  the  Twenty-Eighth 
Letter.  My  close  friends  know  these,  and  Süleyman  Efendi,  my  constant  friend, 
knows  many  of  them.  We  experience  an  extraordinary  and  wondrous  ease  in 
spreading  the  Words  in  particular  and  other  treatises,  and  in  correcting  them,  and 
putting them in order, and in the rough and final drafts. I have no doubt that this is a 
wonder of the Qur’an. There have been hundreds of instances of it. 

Furthermore,  we  are  nurtured  with  great  tenderness  in  our  daily  lives  with  the 
Gracious One who employs us bestowing on us the least desires of our hearts in ways 
entirely outside the ordinary in order to gratify us. And so on. This situation is a truly 
powerful sign from the Unseen that we are  

 

433

being  employed;  we  are  being  made  to  serve  the  Qur’an  both  within  the  sphere  of 
divine pleasure, and through divine favour. 

All praise be to God, this is a bounty from my Lord and Sustainer! 
All  Glory  be  unto  You!  We  have  no  knowledge  save  that  which  You  have 
taught us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise!(2:32) 
O  God! Grant blessings  to  our  master  Muhammad  that  will  be  pleasing  to 
You and fulfilment of his truth, and to his Family and Companions, and grant 
them peace. Amen. 

 

434

The Answer 
to a Confidential Question 

instance  of  divine  favour  was  written  some 

 [This 
time  ago 
confidentially  and  was  added  to  the  end  of  the  Fourteenth  Word. 
However, most of the scribes have forgotten it and not written it. That 
is  to  say,  the  appropriate  place  for  it  must  have  been  here,  since  it 
remained unknown.] 

Y o u  a s k  m e : “How is it that in the Words you have written from the Qur’an 
are  a  power  and  effectiveness  rarely  to  be  found  in  the  words  of  Qur’anic 
commentators  and  those  with  knowledge  of  God?  Sometimes  a  single  line  is  as 
powerful as a page, and one page as effective as a book?” 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  A  good  answer:  since  the  honour belongs  to  the Qur’an’s 
miraculousness and not to me, I say fearlessly: it is mostly like that for the following 
reason: 

The Words that have been written are not supposition, they are affirmation; they 
are  not  submission,  they  are  belief;  they  are  not  intuitive  knowledge  (marifet),  they 
are a testifying and witnessing; they are not imitating, they are verification; they are 
not taking the part of something, they are comprehension of it; they are  not Sufism, 
they  are  reality  (hakikat);  they  are  not  a  claim,  they  are  the proof  within  the  claim. 
The wisdom in this is as follows: 

Formerly,  the  fundamentals  of  belief  were  protected,  submission  was  strong. 
Even  if the  intuitive  knowledge of those with  knowledge of God lacked proof, their 
expositions were acceptable and sufficient. But at this time, since the misguidance of 
science has stretched out its hand to the fundamentals and pillars [of belief], the All-
Wise  and  Compassionate  One  of  Glory,  who  bestows  a  remedy  for  every  ill,  in 
consequence of my impotence and weakness, want and need, mercifully bestowed in 
these writings of mine which serve the Qur’an a single ray  from the comparisons of 
that Noble Qur’an, which are a most brilliant manifestation of its miraculousness. All 
praise  be  to  God,  distant  truths  were  brought  close  through  the  telescope  of  the 
mystery of comparisons. Through the aspect of unity of the mystery of comparisons, 
truly disparate matters were collected together. Through the stairs of the mystery of 
comparisons, the highest truths were  

 

435

easily  reached.  Through  the  window  of  the  mystery  of  comparisons,  a  certainty  of 
belief in the truths of the Unseen and fundamentals of Islam was obtained close to the 
degree of witnessing (şuhûd). The intellect, as well as the imagination and fancy, and 
the  soul  and  caprice,  were  compelled  to  submit,  and  Satan  too  was  compelled  to 
surrender his weapons. 

In Short: Whatever beauty and effectiveness are found in my writings, they are 
only flashes of the Qur’anic comparisons. My share is only my intense need and my 
seeking, and my extreme impotence and my beseeching. The ill is mine, and the cure, 
the Qur’an’s. 

 

436

The Conclusion 
of the Seventh Matter 

 [This is to banish any doubts that have arisen or may arise concerning 
the  signs  from  the  Unseen  apparent  in  the  form  of  the  above  eight 
divine  favours,  and  describes  a  further  divine  favour  and  its  mighty 
mystery] 

This conclusion consists of four points. 

FIRST POINT 

We claimed in the Seventh Matter of the Twenty-Eighth Letter that we saw a sign 
from the Unseen, called the Eighth Favour, which we perceived in the seven or eight 
universal,  immaterial  divine  favours,  and  a  manifestation  of  that  sign  in  the 
embroideries known as the coincidences (tevâfukat). And we claim that those seven or 
eight universal divine favours are so powerful and certain that each on its own proves 
those signs from the Unseen. If, to suppose the impossible, some appear weak, or are 
denied even, it will not damage the certainty of that sign from the Unseen. A person 
who cannot deny the divine favours, cannot deny the signs. But because people differ 
in  respect  of  their  level,  and  because  the  most  numerous  level,  the  mass  of  people, 
rely mostly on what they see, since the coincidences are not the most powerful but the 
most apparent of the eight divine favours – certainly the others are more powerful but 
since  this  is  more  general  –  I  have  been  compelled  to  expound  a  truth  by  way  of 
comparing them, with the intention of dispelling those doubts. It is like this: 

We  said  concerning  the  apparent  divine  favour  that  so  many  coincidences 
appeared in the word “Qur’an” and the phrase “God’s Noble Messenger, Upon whom 
be blessings and peace” in the treatise we had written that no doubt remained that they 
had  been  ordered  intentionally  and  given  mutually  corresponding  positions.  Our 
evidence that the will and intention is not ours is that we became aware of them only 
three  or  four  years  later.  In  which  case,  as  a  work  of  divine  favour,  the  will  and 
intention  pertain  to  the  Unseen.  This  singular  situation  was  bestowed  solely  to 
corroborate the miraculousness of the Qur’an and of Muhammad (UWBP), and in the 
form of the coincidences involving those two words. In addition to the blessedness of 
these two words being a ratifying stamp of the Qur’an’s miracu 

 

437

lousness  and  the  miracles  of  Muhammad  (UWBP),  the  great  majority  of  similar 
phrases manifest coincidences, but they appear only on a single page, while the two 
above phrases appear throughout the two treatises and in most of the others. We have 
said repeatedly that essentially coincidences may be found in other books, but not to 
this  extraordinary  extent,  which  demonstrates  an  elevated  will  and  intention.  Now, 
although it is not possible to refute what we claim, there are one or two ways that it 
might appear to be thus if glanced at superficially. 

One is that they may say: “You had these coincidences in mind and brought them 
about in this way. It would be easy to do that intentionally.” In reply we say this: in 
any  matter  two  truthful  witnesses  are  sufficient,  but  in  this  case  a  hundred  truthful 
witnesses may be found who will testify that our will and intention played no part and 
that  we  became  aware  of  it  only  three  or  four  years  later.  I  want  to  say  in  this 
connection that this wonder of the Qur’an proceeding from its miraculousness is not 
similar  in  kind  to  its  miraculous  eloquence,  or  equal  in  degree.  For  that  is  beyond 
human power. But this wonder of its miraculousness could not occur through human 
power either; human power could not intervene in such a matter. If it did, it would be 
artificial and spoil it.1 

Third Point 

In  connection  with  particular  signs  and  general  signs,  we  shall  indicate  a  fine 

point of dominicality and mercifulness: 

One  of  my  brothers  said  something  very  good;  I shall  make  it  the  subject  here. 
What he said was this: one day I showed him a clear example of a coincidence and he 
said: “That’s good! In fact all truths and realities are good, but the coincidences in the 
Words and its success are even better.” “Yes,” I said, “everything is in reality good, or 
in  itself  good,  or  good  in  respect  of  its  results.  And  this  goodness  looks  to  general 
dominicality,  all-embracing  mercy,  and  universal  manifestation.  Like  you  said,  the 
sign from the Unseen in this success is even better. This is because it takes the form 
of  a  particular  mercy  and  particular  dominicality  and  particular  manifestation.”  We 
shall make this easier to understand with a comparison. It is like this: 

                                                 
1 In one copy, on a page of the Eighteenth Sign of the Nineteenth Letter, the word “Qur’an” coincided 
nine times in this way. We drew a line through these and the word “Muhammad” appeared. Then on 
the opposite the page, the word “Qur’an” appeared eight times, and from all these the name of “Allah” 
emerged. Many wondrous things like these have been observed in the coincidences. We saw them with 
our own eyes. Signed: Bekir, Tevfik, Suleyman, Galib, Said 

 

438

Through  his  universal  sovereignty  and  law,  a  king  may  encompass  all  the 
members of  his  nation  with  his  royal  mercy.  Each  receives the  king’s  favour  and  is 
subject  to  his  rule  directly.  The  members  all  have  numerous  particular  connections 
within the universality. 

The second aspect are the king’s particular bounties and particular orders: above 

the law, he bestows favours on persons and gives his orders. 

Like this comparison, everything receives a share of the general dominicality and 
all-encompassing  mercy  of  the  Necessarily  Existent  One,  the  All-Wise  and 
Compassionate Creator. He has disposal over everything through His power, will, and 
all-embracing  knowledge;  He  intervenes  in  the  most  insignificant  matters  of  all 
things;  His  dominicality  embraces  them.  Everything  is  in  need  of  Him  in  every 
respect.  All  of  their  works  are  performed  and  ordered  through  His  knowledge  and 
wisdom.  Neither  nature  has  the  ability  to  hide  within  the  sphere  of  disposal  of  His 
dominicality, or have any effect or intervene, nor can chance interfere in the works of 
His wisdom and its fine balance. We have refuted chance and nature in twenty places 
in the Risale-i Nur with decisive proofs, executing them with the sword of the Qur’an; 
we  have demonstrated their  interference to be impossible. But the people of neglect 
have called “chance,” matters they do not know the wisdom of and reason for in the 
sphere of apparent causes within universal dominicality. They have been unable to see 
some of the laws of the divine acts concealed beneath the veil of nature, the wisdom 
and purposes of which they do not comprehend, and they have recourse to nature. 

The  second  is  His  particular  dominicality  and  particular  favours  and  merciful 
succour, through which the names of Merciful and Compassionate come to the aid of 
individuals  unable  to  bear  the  constraints  of  the  general  laws;  they  assist  them  in 
particular fashion and save them from those crushing constraints. Therefore, all living 
beings and especially man may seek help from Him at all times, and receive succour. 

Thus, the favours in this particular dominicality cannot be hidden under chance 

by the people of neglect, nor be ascribed to nature. 

It is in consequence of this that we have considered and believed the signs from 
the Unseen in The Miraculousness of the Qur’an and The Miracles of Muhammad to 
be  particular  signs,  certain  that  they  are  a  particular  succour  and  particular  divine 
favour showing themselves against the obdurate deniers. So we have proclaimed them 
purely for God’s sake. If we were mistaken in doing so, may God forgive us. Amen. 

O our Sustainer, do not take us to task if we forget or do wrong.(2:286) 

 

439

The Eighth Matter, 
which is the Eighth Part 

 [This matter consists of six questions comprising eight points.] 

FIRST POINT 

We  have  perceived  many  signs  from  the  Unseen  suggesting  that  we  are  being 
employed in the service of the Qur’an by a hand of favour, and some of these we have 
pointed out. Now, a new sign is this: most of the Words contain coincidences from the 
Unseen  (tevâfukat-ı  gaybiye).1  In  short,  it  indicates  that  a  sort  of  manifestation  of 
miraculousness is embodied in the words “God’s Most Noble Messenger,” the phrase, 
“Upon whom  be blessings  and peace,” and  in  the  blessed  word  “Qur’an.”  However 
hidden  and  slight  signs  from  the  Unseen  are,  they  indicate  the  acceptability  of  our 
service and rightness of the matters, and so in my opinion hold great importance and 
power. Furthermore, they break my pride and have demonstrated to me categorically 
that I am merely an interpreter. They leave nothing to cause me pride; they only show 
up things that prompt thanks. Since they pertain to the Qur’an and pass to the account 
of  its  miraculousness;  and  since  our  wills  definitely  do not  interfere;  and  since  they 
encourage  those  who  are  lazy  in  their  service,  and  afford  the  conviction  that  the 
treatises  are  true;  and  since  they  are  a  form  of  divine  bestowal  to  us,  and  to  make 
them known is to make known a divine bounty, and to do so reduces to silence those 
obdurate  people  who  understand  only  what  they  see;  it  is  surely  necessary  to  make 
them known; God willing, it causes no harm. 

One  of  the  signs  from  the  Unseen  is  this:  out  of  His  perfect  mercy  and 
munificence, in order to encourage us in our service of the Qur’an and faith and put 
our  hearts  at  rest,  Almighty  God  bestowed  a  subtle  dominical  favour  on  us  and  a 
divine  gift  in  all  the  treatises  we  have  written,  and  particularly  in  The  Miracles  of 
Muhammad, The Miraculousness of the  

                                                 
1 Coincidences indicate mutual correspondence, and mutual correspondence indicates agreement, and 
agreement is a sign of unity, and unity shows unification, that is, the affirmation of divine unity 
(tawhid), which is the greatest of the Qur’an’s four aims. 

 

440

Qur’an, and Thirty-Three Windows, in the form of a sign from the Unseen indicating 
the acceptability of our service and that what we have written is the truth. That is, He 
causes the same words on a page to face one another. In this is a sign from the Unseen 
that they are ordered by an unseen will which says: “Don’t rely on your own wills and 
comprehension. Without  your knowing or being  aware of it, wondrous embroideries 
and arrangements  are being made.” The words “God’s Most Noble Messenger” and 
“Upon whom be blessings and peace” in The Miracles of Muhammad in particular are 
like  mirrors  showing  clearly  the  signs  of  those  coincidences  from  the  Unseen.  In  a 
copy  written  by  a  new,  inexperienced  scribe,  on  all  the  pages  other  than  five,  more 
than two hundred “Upon whom be blessings and peace”s face one another in lines. 

These coincidences are not the work of chance, which might unconsciously give 
rise to one or two out of ten, neither do they spring from the thought of an unfortunate 
like myself, who is unskilled in art, and, concentrating only on the meaning, dictates 
thirty to forty pages at great speed in one hour, not writing himself but getting others 
to write.  

I became aware of them only after six  years through the guidance of the Qur’an 
and  the  coinciding  of  nine  instances  of  the  pronoun  “inna”  in  the  Qur’anic 
commentary, Isharat al-I’jaz (Signs of Miraculousness). The copyists were astounded 
when  they  heard  about  them  from  me.  The  words  “God’s  Noble  Messenger”  and 
“Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace”  in  the  Nineteenth  Letter  were  like  a  small 
mirror  reflecting  one  of  Muhammad’s  (UWBP)  miracles.  Similarly,  the  word 
“Qur’an”  in  the  Twenty-Fifth  Word,  The  Miraculousness  of  the  Qur’an,  and  in  the 
Eighteenth  Sign  of  the  Nineteenth  Letter,  manifested  a  sort  of  miracle:  of  the  forty 
classes of humanity, a kind of the Qur’an’s miraculousness was manifested before the 
class  of  people  who  rely  on  what  they  see  with  their  eyes,  in  all  the  treatises  in  the 
form of coincidences from the Unseen, which is only one sort of the forty sorts of that 
kind  of  miraculousness.  And  of  its  forty  types,  it  was  manifested  through  the  word 
“Qur’an.” It was as follows: 

The word “Qur’an” was repeated a hundred times in the Twenty-Fifth Word and 
in the Eighteenth Sign of the Nineteenth Letter; it did not conform only rarely, once 
or  twice;  all  the  rest  look  to  each  other.  For  example,  on  page  forty-three  in  the 
Second Ray, the word “Qur’an” appears seven times and they all face each other. On 
page fifty-six, eight instances of it face each other; only the ninth is an exception. The 
five instances of the word on page sixty-nine, now open before me, face each other. 
And  so on.  On  all  the  pages the  instances  of  the  word  “Qur’an”  correspond.  Out of 
five or six only rarely does one remain outside the pattern.   

 

441

As  for other  words, on  page  thirty-three  –  now open  in front  of  me  –  the  word 
“am” (or) is repeated fifteen times and fourteen of them face each other. And on this 
page  there  are  nine  instances  of  the  word  “iman”  (faith  or  belief);  they  face  each 
other. Only, because the scribe left a large space, one of them has deviated a little. On 
the page now open before me, the word “mahbub” (beloved) is repeated twice; one on 
the third line and one on the  fifteenth; they  look to each other in perfectly balanced 
fashion.  Between  them, four  instances  of  the  word  “aşk”  (love)  have  been  arranged 
looking to each other. Other coincidences from the Unseen may be compared to these. 
Whoever the scribe, and whatever form their lines and pages take, these coincidences 
are bound to occur to such an extent that it cannot be doubted that they are neither the 
work  of  chance  nor  the  creation  of  the  author and  scribes.  However,  they  are  more 
striking  when  written  by  some  of  them.  This  means  there  is  a  handwriting  that  fits 
these treatises. Some of the scribes approach it. It is strange, it appears most not with 
the most skilful of them but with the most inexperienced. It  is understood from this 
that the art, grace, and virtues of the Words, which are a sort of commentary on the 
Qur’an, are not anybody’s; the garments of the harmonious, well-ordered style, which 
fit the blessed stature of the orderly, beautiful Qur’anic truths, are not measured and 
cut  out  voluntarily  and  consciousnessly  by  anyone.  It  is  that  their  stature  requires 
them to be thus; it is an unseen hand that measures them and cuts them according to 
the stature, and clothes it in them. As for myself  (lit. us), I am an interpreter among 
them, a servant. 

FOURTH POINT 

In  your  first  question,  you  ask  five  or  six  questions:  “What  will  the  Great 
Gathering and Last Judgement be like? Will everyone be naked? How shall we find 
our  friends  there,  and  how  shall  we  find  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon  whom  be 
blessings  and  peace)  in  order  to  avail  ourselves  of  his  intercession?  How  will 
innumerable people meet with a single person? What will the garments of the people 
of Paradise and those of Hell be like? And who will show us the way?” 

T h e  A n s w e r : The answers to these questions are  given most clearly and 
explicitly  in  the  books  of  Hadith.  Here  we  shall  mention  only  one  or  two  points 
related to our way and method. As follows:   

Firstly: It is explained in a letter2 that the field of the resurrection is within the 

earth’s annual orbit. Just as it now sends its immaterial produce  

                                                 
2 See, The First Letter, page 

 

442

to the tablets of that field, so with its annual rotation it defines a circle, and through 
the  produce  of  that  existent  circle  is  a  source  for  the  formation  of  the  field  of  the 
resurrection. The Lesser Hell at the centre of this dominical ship known as the earth 
will be emptied into the Greater  Hell, so too its inhabitants will be emptied into the 
field of the resurrection. 

Secondly: The occurrence of the resurrection, as well as the existence of the field 
where  it  will  take  place,  have  been  proved  decisively  chiefly  in  the  Tenth  and 
Twenty-Ninth Words, and in others of the Words. 

Thirdly: As for meeting with people, it is proved conclusively in the Sixteenth, 
Thirty-First,  and  Thirty-Second  Words  that  through  the  mystery  of  luminosity  a 
person may be present in thousands of places at the same instant, and may meet with 
millions of people. 

Fourthly: It is required by the name of All-Wise that at the Great Gathering and 
resurrection of the dead, having been stripped of artificial clothes, Almighty God will 
clothe men in natural garments, just as He now clothes beings with spirits, other than 
man,  in  natural  garments.  In  this  world,  the  wisdom  in  artificial  clothes  is  not 
restricted  to  protection  against  heat  and  cold,  adornment,  and  covering  the  private 
parts;  another  important  instance  of  wisdom  is  their  resembling  an  index  or  list 
indicating  man’s  power  of  disposal  over  the  other  species  of  beings,  and  his 
relationship with them, and commandership over them. He might otherwise have been 
clothed in cheap and easy  natural dress. For if it had not been for this wisdom, man 
would have draped himself in various rags, becoming the laughing-stock of conscious 
animals  and  a  buffoon  in  their  eyes;  he  would  have  make  them  laugh.  At  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead  this  relation  will  not  be  present,  nor  will  the  instance  of 
wisdom, so neither should the list be present. 

Fifthly:  When  it  comes  to  having  someone  to  show  the  way,  for  those  like 
yourself who have entered under the light of the Qur’an, it will be the Qur’an. Look at 
the start of the Suras which begin Alif. Lam. Mim., and Alif. Lam. Ra., and Ha. Mim.: 
you will see and understand how acceptable an intercessor is the Qur’an, how true a 
guide, how sacred a light!  

Sixthly: As for the garments of the people of Paradise and the people of Hell, the 
principle in the Twenty-Eighth Word explaining why the houris wear seventy dresses 
is applicable here too. It is as follows: 

A  person  of  Paradise  will  of  course  want  to  benefit  continuously  from  all  the 
varieties of beings there. The good things of Paradise will vary greatly. He will all the 
time  communicate  with  all  the  varieties  of  its  beings.  In  which  case,  he  will  clothe 
himself  and  his  houris  in samples,  in  small  amount,  of  the  good  things  of  Paradise, 
and they will each become like small Paradises. 

 

443

For  example,  a  person  collects  together  in  his  garden  samples  of  the  flower 
species dispersed throughout the country, making it a miniature specimen of it; and a 
shopkeeper collects samples of all his wares in a list; and a man makes for himself a 
garment  and  everything  necessary  for  his  house  from  samples  of  all  the  species  of 
creatures  in  the  world,  which  he  governs,  has  disposal  over,  and  with  which  he  is 
connected. 

Similarly, a person whose abode is Paradise – especially if he used all his senses 
and  non-physical  faculties  in  worship  and  has  gained  the  right  to  experience  the 
pleasures  of  Paradise  –  will  himself  and  his  houris  be  clothed  by  divine  mercy  in  a 
sort  of  garment  that  will  show  every  one  of  all  the  varieties  of  the  wonders  of 
Paradise,  so  as  to  gratify  all  his  senses,  please  all  his  members,  and  delight  all  his 
subtle faculties. 

Evidence that those numerous garments will not all be of the same kind or sort is 
the Hadith: “The houris will be dressed in seventy garments,  yet the marrow in their 
leg bones will still be visible.”3 That is to say, from the top garment to the innermost 
one, there will be degrees gratifying and delighting all the senses and members with 
different subtle wonders in different ways.  

As for the people of Hell, since they committed sins in this world with their eyes, 
their  ears,  their  hearts,  their  hands,  and  their  minds,  and  so  on,  it  does  not  seem 
contrary to wisdom and justice that in Hell they will be made to wear a garment made 
up of various pieces that will be a small Hell, and will cause them torment and pain in 
accordance with their sins. 

FIFTH POINT 

You  ask  if  in  that  period  between  prophets  the  forefathers  of  the  God’s  Noble 
Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  belonged  to  a  religion  and  were 
religious. 

T h e  A n s w e r : There are narrations stating that they were religious, adhering 
to the vestiges of the religion of Abraham (Upon whom be peace),4 which, under the 
veils  of  heedlessness  and  spiritual  darkness,  persisted  in  certain  special  people. 
Certainly,  the  persons  who  formed  the  luminous  chain  stretching  from  Abraham 
(Upon whom be peace) and concluding in the Most Noble Messsenger (Upon whom 
be blessings and peace) were not indifferent towards the light of the true religion and 
were not defeated by the darkness of unbelief. But in accordance with the verse, 

                                                 
3 Bukhari, Bad’ al-Khalq, 8; Tirmidhi, Qiyama, 60; Janna, 5; Darimi, Riqaq, 108; Musnad, ii, 345; iii, 
16. 
4 Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 414. 

 

444

Nor  would  We  visit  with  Our  wrath  until  We  had  sent  a  prophet  [to  give 
warning],(17:15) 

people  who  live  at  a  time  between  prophets  will  be  saved.  It  has  been  stated 
unanimously  that they  will not  be punished  for  their  mistakes  in  secondary  matters. 
According  to  Imam  Shafi‘i  and  Imam  Ash‘ari,  even  if  they  are  deniers  and  do  not 
believe  in  the  fundamentals  of  belief,  they  will  still  be  saved.  For  accountability  to 
God  is  established  with  the  sending  of  prophets,  and  when  prophets  are  sent  people 
become  accountable  by  knowing  about  their  mission.  Since  heedlessness  and  the 
passage  of  time  had  obscured  the  religions  of  the  former  prophets,  they  could  not 
provide the proof for the people of that time. If the people obeyed the former religion, 
they will receive reward; if they did not, they will not be punished. For since  it was 
hidden, it could not be a proof. 

SIXTH POINT 

You  ask:  “Were  there  any  prophets  among  the  forefathers  of  God’s  Noble 

Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace)?” 

T h e  A n s w e r :  There is no certain narration that there were any after Isma‘il 
(Upon  whom  be  peace).  Only  two  prophets  appeared,  called  Khalid  b.  Sinan5  and 
Hanzala,6  who  were  not  his  ancestors.  But  one  of  his  forefathers,  Ka‘b  b.  Lu’ayy, 
composed the following famous and explicit poem, as though quoting scripture: “The 
Prophet  Muhammad  will  suddenly  appear  *  Giving  tidings  most  true,”7  which 
resembles  prophetic  and  miraculous  utterance.  Relying  on  both  evidence  and 
illumination, Imam-i Rabbani said: “Numerous prophets appeared in India, but some 
of them had no followers or only a few people, so they did not become well-known or 
were not called prophets.”8 

According to this principle of the Imam, it is possible there were prophets of this 

kind among the Prophet’s (UWBP) forefathers. 

SEVENTH POINT 

You ask: “Which of the narrations mentioning the faith of the Messenger’s (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace) parents, and that of his grandfather ‘Abd al-Muttalib, is 
the most authentic and sound?” 

T h e  A n s w e r : For ten years the New Said has had no book with him  

                                                 
5 Ibn Sa’d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, i, 296; Ibn Hajar, al-Isaba, i, 466; Ibn Athir, Asd al-Ghaba, ii, 99. 
6 Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, i, 212-3; Zirikli, al-‘Alam, ii, 286. 
7 Abu Nu’aym, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, i, 90; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, ii, 227. 
8 Imam Rabbani, al-Maktubat, i, 239 (No: 259). 

 

445

other than the Qur’an, which  he says  is sufficient for him. I do not have the time to 
study all the books of Hadith about secondary matters such as that, and write which is 
the  soundest  and  most  authentic.  I  will  only  say  this  much,  that  the  Noble 
Messenger’s (Upon whom be blessings and peace) parents were believers and will be 
saved  and  go  to  Paradise.9  Surely  Almighty  God  would  not  wound  His  Noble 
Beloved’s blessed heart with its filial tenderness. 

If  i t  i s  a s k e d : “Seeing that it is thus, why weren’t they able to believe in 
God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace)? Why didn’t they live to see 
his mission?” 

 T h e  A n s w e r : Out of His munificence, in order to gratify the Messenger’s 
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) filial sentiments, Almighty God did not put his  
parents under any obligation to him. His mercy required that to make them happy and 
to please His Noble Beloved, He did not take them from the rank of parenthood and 
put  them  in  that  of  spiritual  offspring;  He  did  not  place  his  parents  and  grandfather 
among  his  outward  community.  However,  He  bestowed  on  them  the  merit,  virtues, 
and happiness of his community. If an exalted field marshal’s father, who has the rank 
of  captain,  entered  his  son’s  presence,  he  would  be  overwhelmed  by  two  opposing 
emotions. So, compassionately, the king does not post the father to the retinue of his 
elevated lieutenant, the field marshal. 

EIGHTH POINT  

Abu Talib?” 

You ask: “What is the most authentic narration concerning the faith of his uncle, 

T h e  A n s w e r :  The Shi‘a agree that he believed, while most of the Sunnis do 
not agree. But what occurs to my heart is this: Abu Talib loved most earnestly, not the 
Most  Noble  Messenger’s  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  messengership,  but 
his person and his self. That most earnest personal love and tenderness surely will not 
go for nothing. Yes, Abu Talib loved Almighty  God’s Noble Beloved sincerely  and 
protected  and  supported  him;  it  was  because  of  feelings  like  shame  and  tribal 
solidarity that  he did not believe in  him  in acceptable fashion, not out of denial and 
obduracy. If due to this he goes to Hell, God Almighty may create a sort of particular 
Paradise for him, in reward for his good actions. As He sometimes creates the spring 
during winter, and for people in prison by means of sleep  

                                                 
9 Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 412-4; Suyuti, al-Rasa’il al-Tis’a (al-Ta’zim wa’l-Minna f’ 
Anna Abaway Rasul Allah (SAW) fi’l-Janna) ed. ‘Izzuddên al-Sa’idi (Beirut: 1988), 133-89. 

 

446

transforms the prison into a palace, so too He may turn a particular Hell into a sort of 
particular Paradise... 

The knowledge of it is with God alone. * None knows the Unseen save God. 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32) 

 

447

The Twenty-Ninth Letter 

 [The  Twenty-Ninth  Letter  consists  of  nine  sections.  This,  the  First 
Section, contains nine points.] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise!(17:44) 

My Dear, Loyal Brother and True Friend in the Service of the Qur’an! 
This  time  in  your  letter  you  want  an  answer  to  an  important  question  which 

neither my time nor my state of mind permit me to answer. 

My  brother!  Praise  be  to  God,  this  year  the  numbers  of  those  writing  out  the 
treatises  have  grown considerably. The copies come to me for the second correction 
and  I  am  busy  doing  them  speedily  from morning  to  evening.  Other  important  jobs 
remain  undone  but  I  consider  this  duty  to  be  far  more  important.  The  heart 
predominates  over  the  reason  in  the  months  of  Sha‘ban  and  Ramadan  in  particular, 
and the spirit becomes animated. So I shall postpone this important matter to another 
time and write to you about it gradually whenever my heart is inspired by Almighty 
God’s mercy. For now I shall explain three points.1 

FIRST POINT  

The  idea  expressed  as:  “The  All-Wise  Qur’an’s  mysteries  are  not  known;  the 
Qur’anic commentators have not understood its reality” has two aspects, and there are 
two groups of people who say it: 

The  First  are  the  people  of  truth  and  the  exacting  scholars.  They  say:  “The 
Qur’an is an unending, inexhaustible treasury. Every era both submits to and accepts 
its  established,  incontestible  matters,  and  receives  its  share  of  its  hidden  truths  as  a 
sort of supplement; it cannot trespass on the shares  

                                                 
1 The nine points were finally completed. 

 

448

of other ages which  are concealed.” Yes, that  is to say, as time passes the All-Wise 
Qur’an’s truths are increasingly disclosed. But not, God forbid! so as to cause doubt 
concerning the self-evident Qur’anic truths that previous generations have expounded. 
For belief in them is obligatory; they are established, definite, fundamental, and basic. 
The  verse,  “A  perspicuous  Arabic  Qur’an”(16:103)  states  that  its  meaning  is  clear. 
From  beginning  to  end,  the  divine  address  revolves  around  those  meanings, 
corroborating  them  and  making  them  clear.  Not  to  accept  those  authoritative 
meanings  suggests,  God  forbid!,  denying  Almighty  God  and 
the 
Messenger’s  (UWBP)  understanding.  That  is  to  say,  those  authoritative  meanings 
have  been  taken successively  from the  source of  Messengership.  Ibn  Jarir  al-Tabari 
wrote his great commentary relating all the meanings of the Qur’an through chains of 
authentic transmission to the source of Messengership. 

insulting 

The Second Group are either foolish friends who cause harm and make matters 
worse, or  they  are  diabolically  cunning  enemies  who  want  to  oppose  the  rulings  of 
Islam and truths of belief. They want to find a way into the fortified Suras of the All-
Wise Qur’an, which, in  your words, are each like steel strongholds. People like that 
spread  about  ideas  like  the  above  in  order,  God  forbid!,  to  excite  doubts  about  the 
truths of belief and the Qur’an. 

SECOND POINT  

Almighty God swears by many things in the Qur’an. The Qur’anic oaths contain 
numerous mysteries and significant points. For example, the oath in “By the Sun and 
its  [glorious]  splendour”(91:1)  forms  the  basis  of  the  splendid  comparison  in  the 
Eleventh Word; it depicts the universe as a palace and a city. The oath of “Ya. Sin. * 
By  the  Qur’an  full  of  wisdom”(36:1-2)  calls  attention  to  the  sacredness  of  the 
Qur’an’s  miraculousness,  and  indicates  that  it  is  so  worthy  of  veneration  it  can  be 
sworn by. The oaths in “By the star when its  goes down,”(53:1) and “Furthermore I 
call to witness the setting of the stars, * And that is indeed a mighty adjuration if you 
but  knew”(56:75-6)  indicate  that  falling  stars  are  a  sign  that  jinns  and  devils  have 
been  prevented  from  receiving  news  from  the  Unseen  so  that  they  cannot  cause 
doubts about revelation. They also point to the vast power and perfect wisdom in the 
awesomely vast stars being set in their places in perfect order and in the planets being 
made to revolve in wondrous manner. With the oaths, “By the [winds] that scatter and 
broadcast;”(51:1) * “By the [winds] sent forth,”(71:1) it attracts attention to the angels 
appointed to the winds, in order to call to mind the significant instances of wisdom in 
the  

 

449

disposal of the air and its movement in waves. For the elements, which are supposed 
to be governed by chance, perform important duties for most subtle purposes; and so 
on.  All  the  oaths  and  their  positions  contain  different points  and  different  purposes. 
For now, since the time is inconvenient, I shall indicate briefly only one fine point out 
of many in the oath, “By the fig and the olive,”(95:1) as follows: 

By swearing by the fig and the olive, Almighty God calls to mind the immensity 
of His power and the perfection of His mercy and His extensive bounties, in order to 
redirect  those  people  who  are  heading  for  the  lowest  of  the  low,  showing  that  they 
may progress spiritually, through thanks, reflection, belief, and good works as far as 
the highest of the high. The reason for specifying the fig and the olive is that as fruits 
they  are  most  blessed  and  beneficial,  and  their  creation  comprises  many  notable 
things and bounties. For the olive is utilized for illumination and food, and is a basic 
commodity  in  social  and  commercial  life.  The  fig  is  the  same;  it  displays  in  its 
creation a miracle of power by encapsulating in its miniscule seed all the members of 
the  huge  fig-tree,  and  is  a  divine  bounty  both  in  its  being  a  food,  and  its  uses,  and 
contrary  to  other  fruits its  continuity,  and  many  other  advantages.  It  calls  all  this  to 
mind with the oath and instructs man to draw lessons from them so as to believe and 
perform good works, and not to fall to the lowest of the low. 

THIRD POINT 

The disjointed letters at the start of some Suras are a divine cipher. Almighty God 
makes allusion to matters of the Unseen with them for His special servant. The key to 
the cipher is with that servant, and with his heirs. The All-Wise Qur’an addresses all 
eras  and  all  the  groups  of  mankind.  It  contains  numerous  different  aspects  and 
meanings  that comprise  the  share  of  every  class  in  every  age.  The  purest  share was 
that of the righteous first generations of Islam, and they expounded it. The people of 
sainthood and the verifiers of reality have found in their writings numerous allusions 
to  the  matters  of  the  Unseen  pertaining  to  spiritual  journeying.  We  have  discussed 
them to a small extent from the point of view of the miraculousness of the Qur’an’s 
eloquence in the commentary called Isharat al-I’jaz (Signs of Miraculousness), at the 
start of Sura al-Baqara; it may be referred to. 

FOURTH POINT 

The Twenty-Fifth Word has proved that a true translation of the All-Wise Qur’an 

is not possible. Also, the elevated style of its miraculousness  

 

450

cannot be translated. It would be extremely difficult to express and make understood 
the  pleasure  and  reality  arising  from  the  elevated  style  in  the  miraculousness  of  its 
meanings (mânevî i’caz). However, we shall allude to one or two aspects of it in order 
to show the way, as follows: 

And among  His  signs  is  the  creation of  the heavens  and  the  earth, and the 
variations  in  your  languages  and  your  colours.(30:22)  *  And  the  heavens 
will be rolled up in His right hand.(39:67) * He creates you in the wombs of 
your mothers in stages, one after another, in three veils of darkness.(39:6) * 
Who  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth  in  six  days.(7:54,  etc.)  *  Comes  in 
between  a  man  and  his  heart.(8:24)  *  From  whom  is  not  hidden  the  least 
little atom.(34:3) * He merges night into day, and He merges day into night; 
and He has full knowledge of the secrets of [all] hearts.(57:6) 

Through  verses  like  these,  with  a  wondrously  elevated  style  and  miraculous 
comprehensiveness,  the  Qur’an  of  Miraculous  Exposition  depicts  the  reality  of 
creativity for the imagination, indicating the following: “With whichever hammer the 
universe’s builder, who is the Maker of the world, fastened the sun and moon in their 
places, with the same hammer and at the same instant He fixes atoms in their places, 
for  example  in  the  pupils  of  living  creatures’  eyes.  And  with  whichever  measure, 
whichever immaterial instrument, He arranged the heavens and unfolded them, at the 
same instant and with the same arrangement, He opens up the eye removing its veils; 
He makes it, orders it, and situates it. And with whichever immaterial hammer of His 
power, the All-Glorious Maker fastens the stars to the skies, with that same hammer 
He  fastens  man’s  innumerable  distinguishing  marks  on  his  countenance  and  his 
external and inner senses in their places.” 

That is to say, in order to show His works to both the eye and the ear while He is 
at work, the All-Glorious Maker strikes a hammer on an atom with the verses of the 
Qur’an, and with another word of the same verse strikes the hammer on the sun; with 
an elevated style as though  striking  it right  in the centre, He demonstrates His unity 
within His oneness, and His infinite glory within His infinite beauty, and His infinite 
tremendousness within His infinite concealedness, and His infinite breadth within His 
infinite precision, and His infinite majesty within His infinite mercy, and His infinite 
distance  within  His  infinite  proximity.  The  Qur’an  expresses  the ultimate  degree  of 
the  combining  of  opposites,  which  is  considered  to  be  impossible,  in  a  way  that  is 
necessary;  it  proves  this  and  demonstrates  it.  Thus,  it  is  this  sort  of  exposition  and 
style that causes the most wondrous literary genius to prostrate before its eloquence. 

 

451

And for example, through the verse, 

And among His signs is this, that heaven and earth stand by His command; 
then  when  He  calls  you,  by  a  single  call,  from  the  earth,  behold,  you 
[straight away] come forth,(30:25) 

Almighty God shows the magnificence of the sovereignty of His dominicality in the 
following elevated manner: 

At a single command or a signal like a bugle, the beings in the heavens and earth, 
which are like two obedient barracks or two orderly army headquarters, will spring up 
with alacrity and perfect obedience from their sleep in the veils of transience and non-
existence.  Declaring:  “At  your  service!”,  they  will  assemble  on  the  field  of  the 
resurrection and last judgement. 

With what miraculous and elevated style it describes the resurrection of the dead 
and  Great  Gathering!  It  points  to  the  following  convincing  proof  contained  in  its 
assertion: observedly, seeds concealed as though dead in the darkness of the earth and 
drops of water hidden and dispersed, non-existent, in the atmosphere are raised to life 
swiftly  and  with  perfect  order every  spring. They  emerge  onto  the  field  of  trial  and 
examination, perpetual examples of resurrection. At the supreme resurrection, beings 
will  emerge  with  same  ease.  Since  you  observe  the  one  here,  you  cannot  deny  the 
other. And so on. You can compare the degree of eloquence in other verses with this 
one. Would it be possible to do a true translation of this sort of verse? Surely it would 
not! At best it would be an abbreviated meaning, or an interpretation, with five or six 
lines for each phrase. 

FIFTH POINT 

For  example,  “All  praise  be  to  God”  (al-hamdulillah)  is  a  Qur’anic  phrase.  Its 
briefest  meaning,  required  by  the  rules  of  grammar  and  rhetoric,  is  this:  “Each 
individual  instance  of  all  the  sorts  of  praise  that  has  been  offered  by  whatever  to 
whatever since pre-eternity and will be offered to post-eternity is particular to and due 
to the Necessarily Existent One alone, who is  named Allah.” It  is as  follows: “Each 
individual instance of all the sorts of praise” is the consequence of the definite article 
“al”  in  “al-hamd.”  As  for  the  qualification  of  “that  has  been  offered  by  whatever,” 
since “praise” (hamd) is the verbal noun and the active participle has been omitted, it 
expresses generality in that sense. By omitting the passive participle it again expresses 
universality  and  generality,  and  therefore  expresses  the  qualification  “to  whatever.” 
As  for  the  qualification  of  “from  pre-eternity  to  post-eternity,”  it  expresses  this 
meaning  because  the  rule  of  transposing  from  a  verbal  clause  to  a  noun  clause 
indicates continuity. The preposi 

 

452

tional  “lam”  in  “lillah”  [to  God],  expresses  the  meaning  of  sole  possession  and 
worthiness. As for the qualification of “the Necessarily Existent One, who is  named 
Allah,” since necessary existence is the necessary requisite of the Godhead and a term 
signifying  the  All-Glorious  Essence;  comprising  all  the  divine  names  and  attributes 
and  being  the  greatest  name,  the  name  of  “Allah”  necessarily  indicates  both  the 
necessary existence and the title of “Necessarily Existent One.”  

If the shortest apparent meaning of the phrase “All praise be to God” on which all 
the  scholars  of  Arabic  are  agreed  is  thus,  how  could  it  be  translated  into  another 
language with the same miraculousness and power? 

Furthermore,  among  all  the  languages  of  the  world,  there  is  only  one  that  can 
compare with Arabic  in being the  language of  grammar, and that can  never achieve 
the comprehensiveness of Arabic. Is  it possible for translations  into other composite 
and inflectional languages by people whose understanding  is partial, comprehension 
short,  ideas  confused,  and  hearts  dark,  to  take  the  place  of  the  sacred  words  of  the 
Qur’an,  which  have  emerged  in  miraculous  fashion  in  that  comprehensive  and 
wondrous grammatical language through an all-encompassing knowledge that knows 
all its aspects at once and wills them. I can even say, and perhaps prove, that all the 
Qur’an’s words are like treasuries of truths, with sometimes a single letter teaching a 
page of truths. 

SIXTH POINT 

I  shall  recount  a  luminous  experience  and  true  vision  I  had  for  the  purpose  of 

illucidating the above. It was as follows: 

One  time,  I  was  pondering  over  the  use  of  the  first  person  plural  in  the  verse 
“You alone do we worship and from You alone do we seek help,”(1:4) and my heart 
was  seeking  the  reason  for  the  first  person  singular  being  transposed  into  the  first 
person plural of “we worship”(na‘budu). Suddenly from that “Nun” the mystery and 
virtues of performing the prayers in congregation were unfolded to me. I saw that my 
participating  in  the  congregation  in  Bayezid  Mosque,  where  I  was  performing  the 
prayer,  made  each  member  of  the  congregation  a  sort  of  intercessor  for  me  who 
testified  to  and  affirmed  each  of  the  statements  I  pronounced  while  reciting  the 
prayers.  In  the  midst  of  the  great,  multiple  worship  of  the  congregation,  I  felt  the 
courage  to  offer  my  deficient  worship  to  the  divine  court.  Then  a  further  veil  was 
lifted. That is, all the mosques of Istanbul were added. The city became like Beyazid 
Mosque.  Suddenly  I  felt  as  though  I  were  receiving  their  prayers  and  affirmation. 
Then within that, I saw myself in the mosque of the face of the earth, in the circular 
rows around the Ka‘ba. I  

 

453

declared: “All praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds! I have intercessors to 
this  great  number;  they  are  all  reciting  exactly  the  same  words  as  I  am  saying, 
confirming  me.”  As  this  veil  was  raised  by  my  imagination,  the  Noble  Ka‘ba 
appeared  to  be  the  mihrab.  Seizing  the  opportunity,  I  called  on  the  ranks  of  the 
congregation to testify and entrusted to the Black Stone the interpreter of faith, that is, 
“I testify that there is no god but God, and I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger 
of God.” While pronouncing this, a further situation was laid open before me: I saw 
that the congregation of which I was a part was divided into three circles: 

The  First  Circle  was  the  vast  congregation  of  believers  and  those  who  affirm 

divine unity on the face of the earth. 

The Second Circle: I looked and saw that I was part of a congregation consisting 
of all beings, all of which, performing prayers and glorification, were occupied with 
the  benedictions  and  glorification  particular  to  its  group  and  species.  Their  worship 
consists of the activities we observe, called “the functions of things.” Declaring: “God 
is Most Great!” before this, I bowed my head in wonderment, and looked at myself: 

Within  a  Third  Circle  I  saw  an  astonishing  microcosm  which  was  apparently 
and  qualitatively  small,  but  in  reality,  number,  and  duties,  great.  This,  from  the 
particles of my being to my external senses was a congregation in which every group 
was preoccupied with duties of worship and thanks. In this circle, the dominical inner 
faculty in my heart was declaring: “You alone do we worship and from You alone do 
we  seek  help”  in  the  name  of  the  congregation.  Just  as  in  the  two  former 
congregations  my  tongue  had  said  it,  having  formed  the  intention  to  say  it  in  their 
names.  

In  Short:  The  “Nun”  of  “na‘budu”  indicates  these  three  congregations.  While 
pondering  over  this,  the  collective  personality  of  God’s  Noble  Messenger  (Upon 
whom  be  blessings  and  peace),  the  Interpreter  and  Herald  of  the  All-Wise  Qur’an, 
was  suddenly  embodied  in  all  its  majesty  in  his  immaterial  pulpit  in  Medina.  Like 
everyone,  I  as  though  heard  his  address  of  “O  you  people!  Worship  your 
Sustainer,”(2:21)  and  everyone  in  those  three  congregations  responded  like  me, 
saying,  “You  alone  do  we  worship.”  In  accordance  with  the  rule,  “If  something  is 
established, it is established together with the things that necessitate it,” the following 
truth was imparted to my mind: 

Taking mankind as His addressee, the Sustainer of All the Worlds speaks with all 
beings, and His Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) conveys that  lofty 
address to mankind, indeed, to all beings with spirits and consciousness. All the past 
and  the  future  have  become  like  the  present;  the  address  is  being  delivered  to 
mankind, all of which is in a  

 

454

single gathering, in the form of a congregation the rows of which all differ. I then saw 
that each Qur’anic verse possesses an elevated power, eloquence, and beauty which it 
had  received  from  the  grandeur and  compass  of  its  station,  its  extremely  numerous, 
various, and significant addressees, from the Pre-Eternal Speaker, the One of infinite 
glory  and  grandeur,  and  from  its  exalted  Interpreter,  who  is  at  the  rank  of  God’s 
beloved; I saw each verse bathed in a brilliant, truly brilliant, light of miraculousness. 
Then,  not  the  whole  Qur’an,  or  a  Sura,  or  a  verse,  but  all  its  words  seemed  to  be 
miracles. “All praise be to God for the light of belief and the Qur’an,”  I declared. I 
emerged  from  my  imagining,  which  was  pure reality,  the  same  as  I  had  entered the 
“Nun” of  “na‘budu,”  and I understood  that  not only  the  Qur’an’s  verses  and  words, 
but some of its  letters,  like the “Nun” of “na‘budu,” are luminous keys to important 
truths. 

After my  heart and imagination  had emerged from the “Nun” of “na‘budu,” my 
mind came forward and said: I want my share too. I cannot fly like you; my feet are 
evidences and proofs. The way leading to the Creator, the Worshipped One and One 
from whom help is sought, has to be pointed out in the same “na‘budu” and “nasta’in” 
(“You    alone  do  we  worship  and  from  You  alone  do  we  seek  help”),  so  that  I  can 
accompany  you. It then occurred to my heart to say the following to my bewildered 
mind: 

Consider  all  the  beings  in  the  universe;  whether  living  or  inanimate,  in  perfect 
order  and  obedience  they  all  have  their  worship  which  is  in  the  form  of  duties. 
Although  some  of  them  lack  feelings  and  intelligence,  they  perform  their  duties  in 
conscious,  orderly,  and  worshipful  fashion.  This  means  there  is  a  True  Object  of 
Worship, an Absolute Commander, who impels them to worship and employs them. 

Now  consider  too  the  beings  and  particularly  the  living  ones;  while  each  has 
extremely  numerous  and  various  needs,  which  have  to  be  met  for  its  continued 
existence,  its  hands cannot reach the smallest of  them;  its power is  insufficient. Yet 
they  all  receive  their  innumerable  needs  regularly,  from  unexpected  places,  at  the 
appropriate time; this is clearly to be seen. 

Thus,  these  boundless  needs  and  this  boundless  want  of  beings  and  that 
extraordinary  assistance  from  the  Unseen  and  merciful  succour  self-evidently 
demonstrate  that  the  beings  have  a  Protector  and  Provider  who  possesses  absolute 
riches,  is  Absolutely  Generous  and  Absolutely  Powerful;  it  is  from  Him  that 
everything and all living beings seek help and await succour, in effect saying: “From 
You  alone  do  we  seek  help.”  So  then  my  mind  declared:  “We  believe  in  this  and 
assent to it!” 

 

455

SEVENTH POINT 

Then, when I said:  

Guide  us  to  the  Straight  Path,    *  The  path  of  those  on  whom  You  have 
bestowed Your bounty,(1:5-6) 

I saw among the convoys of mankind that  were travelling towards the past, was the 
luminous, radiant caravan of the prophets, the veracious ones, the martyrs, the saints, 
and the righteous. They were scattering the darkness of the future and travelling the 
road to post-eternity on a straight way, a direct highway. The phrase was showing me 
the  way  to  join  the  caravan,  indeed,  it  was  joining  me  to  it.  Suddenly  I  exclaimed: 
“Glory be to God! Anyone with an iota of intelligence must know what a loss it is not 
to  join  that  long,  light-scattering  caravan  which  is  illuminating  the  future  and 
travelling  in  perfect  safety.  Where  can  one  who  deviates  from  it  by  creating 
innovations  find  a  light;  which  road  can  he  take?”  Our  guide,  God’s  Most  Noble 
Messenger  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  decreed:  “All  innovations  are 
misguidance, and all misguidance is in Hell-fire.”2  

What  advantage  do  those  wretches  worthy  of  the  epithet  “corrupt  religious 
scholars” find in the face of this certain statement? What fatwa do they issue so that 
unnecessarily  and  harmfully  they  oppose  the  clear  matters  of  the  marks  of  Islam 
(şeâir-i İslâmiye), and deem it possible to change them? It must be that a temporary 
awakening  caused  by  a  fleeting  manifestation  of  meaning  deceived  those  corrupt 
scholars. For example, if an animal or fruit is stripped of its skin, it briefly appears to 
be fresh, but quickly the delicate flesh and delicious fruit go black and rot, with their 
skins  now  estranged,  withered,  thick,  and  extraneous.  In  exactly  the  same  way,  the 
prophetic and divine phrases of the marks of Islam are like a living, meritorious skin. 
On  being  stripped  away,  the  luminosity  of  the  meanings  is  temporarily  naked  and 
somewhat visible. But like a fruit that has been peeled of its skin, the spirit of those 
blessed  meanings  flies  away  leaving  behind  the  human  skin  in  darkened  hearts  and 
minds. The light flies away; just the smoke lingers. However… 

EIGHTH POINT 

as follows: 

A principle concerning reality needs to be explained, which is related to this. It is 

Just as there are two sort of rights, personal rights and general rights, which are 

held to be God’s rights of a sort; so too among the matters of the  

                                                 
2 Muslim, Jum’a 43; Abu Da’ud, Sunna 5; Nasa’i, ‘Idayn 22; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima 6-7; Darimi, 
Muqaddima 16, 23; Musnad iii, 310, 371; iv, 126-7. 

 

456

Shari‘a,  some  concern  individual  persons  and  others,  with  regard  to  generality, 
concern the public. These latter are called “the marks of Islam.” These marks concern 
everyone and everyone participates in them. To interfere in them without the consent 
of the public is an infringement of the public’s rights. The most minor of those marks 
(one which has the status of Sunna) is equal in importance to the greatest matter. They 
concern  the  whole  world  of  Islam  directly.  Those  who  are  trying  to  break  the 
luminous chain to which all the great figures of Islam since the Era of the Prophet till 
now  have  been  bound,  and  to  destroy  it  and  corrupt  it,  and  those  who  assist  them, 
should  dwell  on  what  a  ghastly  error  they  are  making.  If  they  possess  the  smallest 
grain of intelligence, they should tremble! 

NINTH POINT 

Some  matters  of  the  Shari‘a,  concerning  worship,  are  not  linked  to  rational 
thinking; they are performed because they are commanded. The reason for them is the 
command.  

There are others, the reason for which can be understood rationally. That is, they 
comprise some wisdom or benefit due to which they have been incorporated into the 
Shari‘a. But that is not the true reason or cause; the true reason is divine command or 
prohibition. 

Instances  of  wisdom  or  benefits  cannot  change  the  marks  of  Islam  related  to 
worship;  the  aspect  of  them  related  to  worship  preponderates  and  they  may  not  be 
touched. They may not be changed, even for a thousand benefits. Similarly, it is not 
right  to  claim  that  the  uses  of  the  marks  of  Islam  are  limited  to  their  well-known 
purposes.  It  is  a  false  idea.  Such  purposes  are  only  one  out  of  many.  For  instance, 
someone  may  say:  “The  wisdom  in  and  purpose of  the  call  to  prayer  is  to  summon 
Muslims to prayer; in which case, it would be enough  just to fire a rifle.”  However, 
the  foolish  person  does  not  know  that  the  summons  is  only  one  purpose  out  of  the 
thousands. Even if the sound of a rifle shot serves the purpose, how, in the  name of 
mankind, or in the name of the people of the town, can it substitute the call to prayer, 
which  is  a  means  of  proclaiming  worship  before  divine  dominicality  and  heralding 
divine unity, the supreme results of the creation of the universe and of mankind? 

In  Short:  Hell  is  not  unnecessary;  there  are  many  things  which  cry  out  “Long 
live  Hell!”  with  all  their  strength.  Paradise  is  not  cheap,  either;  it  demands  a  high 
price. 

Not  equal  are  the  Companions  of  the  Fire  and  the  Companions  of  the 
Garden; it is the Companions of the Garden who will achieve felicity… (To 
the end of the verse.)(59:20) 

 

457

The Second Section, 
which is the Second Treatise 

On the Month of Ramadan 

 [Since at the  end of the First Section brief  mention  was  made  of the 
marks of Islam, this Second Section discusses Ramadan the Noble, the 
most  brilliant  and  splendid  of  the  marks.  It  consists  of  nine  points 
which explain nine of the numerous instances of wisdom in the month 
of Ramadan.] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
It  was  the  month  of  Ramadan  in  which  the  Qur’an  was  bestowed  from  on 
high as a guidance unto man and a self-evident proof of that guidance, and 
as the standard to discern true from false.(2:185) 

F i r s t  P o i n t 

The  fast  of  Ramadan  is  one  of  the  five  pillars  of  Islam;  it  is  also  one  of  the 

greatest of the marks and observances of Islam. 

There are many purposes and instances of wisdom in the fast of Ramadan which 
look to both God Almighty’s dominicality, and man’s social life, and his personal life, 
and the training of his  instinctual soul, and his  gratitude for divine bounties. One of 
the many instances of wisdom in fasting in respect of God Almighty’s dominicality is 
as follows: 

God  Almighty  creates  the  face  of  the  earth  in  the  form  of  a  table  laden  with 
bounties,  and  arranges  on  the  table  every  sort  of  bounty  as  an  expression  of  “From 
whence  he  does  not  expect.”(65:3)  In  this  way  He  states  the  perfection  of  His 
dominicality  and  His  mercifulness  and  compassionateness.  People  are  unable  to 
discern clearly the reality of this situation while in the sphere of causes, under the veil 
of heedlessness, and they sometimes forget it. But during the month of Ramadan, the 
people of faith suddenly appear as a well-disciplined army: as sunset approaches, they 
display a worshipful attitude as though, having been invited to the Pre-Eternal  

 

458

Monarch’s banquet, they await the command of “Fall to and help yourselves!” They 
respond to that compassionate,  illustrious, and universal mercy with comprehensive, 
exalted, and orderly worship. Do those people who fail to participate in such elevated 
worship and noble bounties deserve to be called human beings? 

S e c o n d  P o i n t 

One  of  the  many  instances  of  wisdom  in  the  fast  of  the  blessed  month  of 

Ramadan with respect to thankfulness for God Almighty’s bounties is as follows: 

As  is  stated  in  the  First  Word,  a  price  is  required  for  the  foods  a  tray-bearer 
brings  from  the  royal  kitchen.  But  to  look  on  those  priceless  bounties  as  valueless 
while tipping the tray-bearer, and not to recognize the one who bestowed them is the 
greatest foolishness.  

God Almighty has spread innumerable sorts of bounties over the face of the earth 
for mankind, in return for which He wishes thanks, as the price of those bounties. The 
apparent causes and holders of the bounties resemble tray-bearers. We pay a certain 
price to them and are indebted to them, and even though they do not merit it are over-
respectful and grateful to them. Whereas the True Bestower of Bounties is infinitely 
more  deserving  of  thanks  than  those  causes  which  are  merely  the  means  of  the 
bounty. To thank Him, then, is to recognize that the bounties come directly from Him; 
it is to appreciate their worth and to perceive one’s own need for them. 

Fasting  in  Ramadan,  then,  is  the  key  to  true,  sincere,  extensive,  and  universal 
thankfulness. For at other times of the year, most people whose circumstances are not 
difficult do not realize the  value of many bounties since they do not experience real 
hunger.  If  their  stomachs  are  full  and  especially  if  they  are  rich,  they  do  not 
understand the degree of bounty present in a piece of dry bread. But when it is time to 
break the fast, the sense of taste testifies that the dry bread is a precious divine bounty 
in  the  eyes  of  a  believer.  During  Ramadan,  everyone  from  the  monarch  to  the 
destitute  manifests  a  sort  of  gratitude  through  understanding  the  value  of  those 
bounties. 

Furthermore, since eating is prohibited during the day, they say: “Those bounties 
do not belong to me. I am not free to eat them, for they belong to someone else and 
are  his  gift.  I  await  his  command.”  They  recognize  the  bounty  to  be  bounty  and so 
give thanks. Thus, fasting in this way is in many respects a key to gratitude; gratitude 
being man’s fundamental duty. 

T h i r d  P o i n t 

social life is as follows: 

One of the many instances of wisdom in fasting from the point of view of man’s 

 

459

Human  beings  have  been  created differently  with  regard  to  their livelihoods.  In 
consequence of this, God Almighty invites the rich to assist the poor, so that through 
the  hunger  experienced  in  fasting,  they  can  truly  understand  the  pains  and  hunger 
which  the  poor  suffer.  If  there  were  no  fasting,  many  self-indulgent  rich  would  be 
unable  to  perceive  just  how  grievous  are  hunger  and  poverty  and  how  needy  of 
compassion are those who suffer them. 

Compassion  for  one’s  fellow  men  is  an  essential  part  of  true  thankfulness. 
Whoever  a  person  is,  there  will  always  be  someone  poorer  than  himself  in  some 
respect.  He  is  enjoined  to  be  compassionate  towards  such  a  person.  If  he  were  not 
himself  compelled  to  suffer  hunger,  he  would  be  unable  give  the  person  –  through 
compassion – the help and assistance he is obliged to offer. And even if he were able, 
it would be deficient, for he would not have truly experienced hunger himself. 

F o u r t h  P o i n t 

instinctual soul is as follows: 

One  instance  of  wisdom  in  fasting  in  Ramadan  with  respect  to  training  the 

The instinctual soul wants to be free and independent, and considers itself to be 
thus. According to the dictates of its nature, it even desires an imaginary dominicality 
and to act as it pleases. It does not want to admit that it is being sustained and trained 
through  innumerable  bounties.  Especially  if  it  possesses  worldly  wealth  and  power, 
and if heedlessness also encourages it, it will devour God’s bounties like a usurping, 
thieving animal. 

Thus, in the month of Ramadan, the instinctual soul of everyone, from the richest 
to the poorest, may understand that it does not own itself but is totally owned; that it 
is not free, but is a slave. It understands that if it receives no command, it may not do 
the  simplest  and  easiest  thing;  it  cannot  even  stretch  out  its  hand  for  water.  Its 
imaginary  dominicality  is  therefore  shattered;  it  performs  its  worship  and  begins  to 
offer thanks, its true duty. 

F i f t h  P o i n t 

One  of  the  many  instances  of  wisdom  in  fasting  in  Ramadan  from  the  point  of 
view  of  improving  the  conduct  of  the  instinctual  soul  and  giving  up  its  rebellious 
habits is as follows: 

Due  to  its  heedlessness  the  human  soul  forgets  itself;  it  cannot  see  its  utter 
powerlessness,  want,  and  deficiency  and  it  does  not  wish  to  see  them.  It  does  not 
think of just how weak it is, and how subject to transience and to disasters, nor of the 
fact that it consists merely of flesh and bones, which  

 

460

quickly  decay  and  fall  apart.  Simply,  it  assaults  the  world  as  though  it  possessed  a 
body made of steel and imagined itself to be undying and eternal. It hurls itself on the 
world  with  intense  greed  and  voracity,  and  passionate  attachment  and  love.  It  is 
captivated by anything that gives it pleasure or that profits it. Moreover, it forgets its 
Creator,  who  sustains  it  with  perfect  compassion,  and  does  not  think  of  the 
consequences of its life and its life in the hereafter. Indeed, it wallows in dissipation 
and misconduct. 

However, fasting in the month of Ramadan awakens even the most heedless and 
obstinate to their weakness, impotence, and want. Hunger makes them think of their 
stomachs  and  they  understand the  need  therein.  They  realize  how  unsound  are  their 
weak bodies, and perceive how needy they are for kindness and compassion. So they 
abandon the soul’s pharaoh-like despotism and recognizing their utter impotence and 
want, perceive a desire to take refuge at the divine court. They prepare themselves to 
knock at the door of mercy with the hands of thankfulness – so long as heedlessness 
has not destroyed their hearts, that is. 

S i x t h  P o i n t 

One  of  the  many  instances  of  wisdom  in  fasting  in  Ramadan  from  the  point  of 
view of the revelation of the All-Wise Qur’an, and the month of Ramadan being the 
most important time in its revelation, is as follows: 

Since  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  was  revealed  in  the  month  of  Ramadan,  to  shun the 
lower  demands  of  the  soul  and  trivialities  and  to  resemble  the  angelic  state  by 
abstaining  from  food  and  drink  in  order  to  greet  that  heavenly  address  in  the  best 
manner, is to attain to a holy state. And to read and listen to the Qur’an as though it 
were just revealed, to listen to the divine address in it as if it were being revealed that 
very  instant,  to  listen  to  that  address  as  though  hearing  it  from  God’s  Noble 
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace), indeed, from the Angel Gabriel, or 
from  the  Pre-Eternal  Speaker  Himself,  is  to  attain  to that  same  holy  state.  To  act  in 
this way is to act as an interpreter and to cause others to listen to it and in some degree 
to demonstrate the wisdom in the Qur’an’s revelation. 

Indeed,  it  is  as  if  the  world  of  Islam  becomes  a  mosque  during  the  month  of 
Ramadan in every corner of which millions of those who know the whole Qur’an by 
heart  make  the  dwellers  on  the  earth  hear  the  heavenly  address.  Each  Ramadan 
proclaims  in  luminous  shining  manner  the  verse  “It  was  the  month  of  Ramadan  in 
which the Qur’an was bestowed from on high;” it proves that Ramadan is the month 
of  the  Qur’an.  Some  of  the  members  of  the  vast  congregation  listen  to  the  reciters 
with reverence, while others read it themselves. 

 

461

Following the appetites of the base instinctual soul while in that sacred mosque, 
and  quitting  that  luminous  condition  through  eating  and  drinking  is  truly  loathsome 
and makes such a person the target of the aversion and disgust of the congregation in 
the mosque. People who oppose those fasting during Ramadan are to the same extent 
the target of the aversion and disgust of the whole world of Islam. 

S e v e n t  h  P o i n t 

One  of  the  many  instances  of  wisdom  in  the  fast  of  Ramadan  with  respect  to 
man’s gain and profit, who comes to this world to cultivate and trade for the hereafter, 
is as follows: 

The reward for actions in the month of Ramadan is a thousandfold. According to 
Hadith,  each  word  of  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  has  ten  merits;  each  is  counted  as  ten 
merits and will  yield ten fruits in Paradise. While during Ramadan, each word bears 
not ten fruits but a thousand, and verses like Ayat al-Kursi(2:255) thousands for each 
word, and on Fridays in Ramadan it is even more. And on the Night of Power, each 
word is counted as thirty thousand merits. 

Indeed, the All-Wise Qur’an, each of whose words  yield thirty thousand eternal 
fruits, is like a luminous Tree of Tuba that gains for believers in Ramadan millions of 
those  eternal  fruits.  So,  come  and  look  at  this  sacred,  eternal  profitable  trade,  then 
consider it and understand the infinite loss of those who do not appreciate the value of 
its words.  

To put  it  simply,  the month  of  Ramadan  is  an  extremely  profitable  display  and 
market  for the  trade  of  the  hereafter.  It  is  an  extremely  fertile  piece  of  land  for the 
crops  of  the  next  world.  For  the  growth  and  flourishing  of  actions  it  is  like  April 
showers  in  the  spring.  It  is  a  brilliant  holy  festival  for  the  parade  of  mankind’s 
worship  in  the  face  of  the  sovereignty  of  divine  dominicality.  Since  it  is  thus, 
mankind has been charged with fasting in order not to heedlessly indulge the animal 
needs  of  the  instinctual  soul  like  eating  and  drinking,  nor  to  indulge  the  appetites 
lustfully and in trivialities. For, by temporarily rising above animality and quitting the 
calls of this world man approaches the angelic state and enters upon the trade of the 
hereafter.  By  fasting,  he  approaches  the  state  of  the  hereafter  and  that  of  a  spirit 
appearing in bodily form. It is as if man then becomes a sort of mirror reflecting the 
Eternally  Besought  One.  Indeed,  the  month  of  Ramadan  comprises  and  gains  a 
permanent, eternal life in this fleeting world and brief transient life. Certainly, a single 
Ramadan  can  produce  fruits  equal  to  that  of  a  lifetime of  eighty  years.  The  Qur’an 
stating  that  the  Night  of  Power  is  more  auspicious  than  a  thousand  months  is  a 
decisive proof of this. 

 

462

For example, a monarch may declare certain days to be festivals during his reign, 
or perhaps  once  a  year, either  on  his  accession to  the  throne  or on  some other  days 
that  reflect  a  glittering  manifestation  of  his  sovereignty.  On  those  occasions  he 
favours his subjects, not within the compass of his laws generally but with his special 
bounties  and  favours  through  his  unveiled presence  and  his  wondrous  activities.  He 
favours with his especial regard and attention those of his nation who are completely 
loyal and worthy . 

In the same way, the All-Glorious Monarch of eighteen thousand worlds, who is 
the Sovereign of Pre-Eternity and Post-Eternity, revealed in Ramadan the  illustrious 
decree of the All-Wise Qur’an, which  looks to the eighteen thousand worlds. It is a 
requirement  of  wisdom,  then,  that  Ramadan  should  be  like  special  divine  festival,  a 
dominical display, and a spiritual gathering. Since Ramadan is such festival, God has 
commanded  man  to  fast,  in  order  to  disengage  him  to  a  degree  from  base,  animal 
activities. 

The most excellent  fasting is to make the human  senses and organs, such as the 
eyes,  ears,  heart,  and thoughts,  fast  together  with  the  stomach.  That  is,  to  withdraw 
them from unlawful things and from trivia, and to urge each of them to their particular 
worship.  For  example,  to  ban  the  tongue  from  lying,  back-biting,  and  obscene 
language and to make it fast; and to busy it with such activities as reciting the Qur’an, 
praying,  glorifying  God’s  Names,  asking  for  God’s  blessings  for  the  Prophet 
Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings and peace), and seeking  forgiveness for sins; 
and for example, to prevent the eyes looking at members of the opposite sex outside 
the stipulated degrees of kinship, and the ears from hearing harmful things, and to use 
the eyes to take lessons and the ears to listen to the truth and to the Qur’an, is to make 
other  organs  fast  too.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  since  the  stomach  is  the  largest  factory, 
when  it  has  an  enforced  holiday  from  work  through  fasting,  the  other  small 
workshops are made to follow it easily. 

E i g h t h  P o i n t 

One  of  the  many  instances  of  wisdom  in  Ramadan  from  the  point  of  view  of 

man’s personal life is as follows: 

It is a healing physical and spiritual diet of the most important kind. When man’s 
instinctual soul eats and drinks just as it pleases, it is both harmful for man’s physical 
life  from  the  medical  point  of  view,  and  when  it  hurls  itself  on  everything  it 
encounters whether licit or illicit, it quite simply poisons his spiritual life. Further, it is 
difficult for such a soul to obey the heart and the spirit; it wilfully takes the reins into 
its own hands and  

 

463

then man cannot ride it, it rather rides man. But by means of fasting  in Ramadan, it 
becomes accustomed to a sort of diet. It tries to discipline itself and learns to listen to 
commands. 

Furthermore,  it  will  not  invite  illness  to  that  miserable,  weak  stomach  by 
cramming  it  with  food  before  the  previous  consignment  has  been  digested.  And  by 
abandoning even licit actions as it is commanded, it will acquire the ability to listen to 
the commands of the Shari‘a and the reason, and so to avoid illicit actions. It will try 
not to destroy his spiritual life. 

Moreover,  the  great  majority  of  mankind  frequently  suffer  from  hunger.  Man, 
therefore, needs hunger and discipline, which train him to be patient and forbearing. 
Fasting  in  Ramadan  is  patient  endurance  of  a  period  of  hunger  that  continues  for 
fifteen  hours,  or  for  twenty-four  if  the  pre-dawn  meal  is  not  eaten,  and  it  is  a 
discipline and training. That is to say, fasting is also a cure for impatience and lack of 
endurance, which double man’s afflictions. 

Futhermore,  the  factory  of  the  stomach  has  many  workers,  and  many  of  the 
human  organs  are  connected  to  it.  If  the  instinctual  soul  does  not  take  a  rest  from 
activity during the day for a month, it makes the factory’s workers and those organs 
forget  their  particular duties;  it busies  them  with itself so  that  they  remain  under  its 
tyranny. Also, it confuses the rest of the organs in the human body with the clangour 
and steam of the factory’s machinery. It continuously attracts their attention to itself, 
making  them  temporarily  forget  their  exalted  duties.  It  is  because  of  this  that  for 
centuries those closest to God have accustomed themselves to discipline and to eating 
and drinking little in order to be perfected. 

Through fasting in Ramadan the factory’s workers understand that they were not 
created for the factory only. While the rest of the organs, instead of delighting in the 
lowly  amusements of the factory, take pleasure in angelic and spiritual amusements, 
and  fix  their  gazes  on  them.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  in  Ramadan  the  believers 
experience  enlightenment,  fruitfulness,  and  spiritual  joys  which  differ  according  to 
their degrees. Their subtle faculties, such as the heart, spirit, and intellect, make great 
progress  and  advancement  in  that  blessed  month  through  fasting.  They  laugh  with 
innocent joy inspite of the stomach’s weeping. 

N i n t h  P o i n t 

One of the  instances of wisdom in fasting  in Ramadan with regard to shattering 
the instinctual soul’s imaginary dominicality and making known its worship through 
pointing out its impotence is as follows: 

The instinctual soul does not want to recognize its Sustainer; it wants its  

 

464

own  lordship,  like  Pharaoh.  However  much  torment  it  suffers,  it  retains  that  vein. 
Hunger,  however,  destroys  it.  Hence,  fasting in  Ramadan  strikes  direct  blows  at  the 
soul’s pharaoh-like  front, shattering  it. It demonstrates its  impotence, weakness, and 
want. It makes it realize that it is a slave. 

Among  the  narrations  of  Hadith  is  the  following:  “God  Almighty  said  to  the 
instinctual soul: ‘What  am  I and what are  you?’  The  soul replied: ‘I  am myself and 
You are Yourself.’ So He punished it and cast it into Hell, then asked it again. Again 
it  replied:  ‘I am  myself  and  You  are  Yourself.’  However  He  punished  it,  it  did  not 
give up its egoism. Finally He punished it with hunger; that is, He made it go hungry. 
Then again He asked it: ‘Who am I and who are you?’ And the soul replied: ‘You are 
my Compassionate Sustainer and I am your impotent slave!’” 

O  God!  Grant  blessings  and  peace  to  our  master  Muhammad  that  will  be 
pleasing to You and fulfilment of his truth to the number of the merits of the 
words  of  the  Qur’an  in  the  month  of  Ramadan,  and  to  his  Family  and 
Companions, and grant them peace. 
Limitless in His glory is your Sustainer, the Lord of Almightiness, [exalted] 
above anything that men may devise by way of definition!  * And peace be 
upon  all  His  message-bearers.  *  And  all  praise  is  due  to  God  alone,  the 
Sustainer of All the Worlds!(37:180-2)1 

                                                 
1 APOLOGY: This Second Section was written at speed when both myself and the rough-copy scribe 
were ill; it is bound therefore to contain disorder and defects. We await from our brothers that they 
look on it with tolerance. They may correct it as they think fit. 

465

The Third Section, 
which is the Third Treatise 

 [I wrote this section in order to present an important intention of mine 
to  my brothers of the hereafter  for their  consideration. It concerns the 
writing  of  a  Qur’an  in  a  way  that  will  show  one  of  the  two  hundred 
sorts of the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition’s miraculousness – a sort 
pertaining to its patterns – with the pages specified in accordance with 
the style of Hafiz Osman and taking the Mudayana Verse(2:282) as the 
measure,  and  taking  Sura  al-Ikhlas  as  the  standard  for  the  lines.  This 
Third  Section,  which  I  wrote  to  consult  them  concerning  this  matter 
and to learn their ideas, and also as  a reminder to  myself,  consists of 
nine matters.]  

FIRST MATTER  

It 

in 

is  established  with  proofs 

the  Twenty-Fifth  Word,  called  The 
Miraculousness  of  the  Qur’an,  that  the  varieties  of  the  Qur’an  of  Mighty  Stature’s 
miraculousness  number  forty.  Some  of  these  are  demonstrated  in  detail,  and  some 
briefly,  so  as  to  convince  even  the  obdurate.  Also,  the  different  sorts  of 
miraculousness  the  Qur’an  shows  to  each  of  forty  of  the  classes  of  humanity  were 
explained in the Eighteenth Sign of the Nineteenth Letter, and the shares received by 
ten of those groups were proved. The remaining thirty classes consist of the followers 
of all the different ways of sainthood and the scholars of all the various sciences, who 
demonstrated  their  certain,  verified  belief  to  the  degrees  of  knowledge  of  certainty, 
vision  of  certainty,  and  absolute  certainty  that  the  Qur’an  is  the  true  Word  of  God. 
That  is  to  say,  each  of  them  discerned  a  different  aspect  of  its  miraculousness  in  a 
different  way.  Yes,  just as  the  miraculousness  a  saint  who  seeks  knowledge  of  God 
understands  will  not  the  same  as  the  beauty  of  the  miraculousness  a  saint  who  is  a 
lover of God witnesses, so the manifestations of the beauty of its miraculousness vary 
according  to  the  different  ways  and  paths.  And  the  aspect  of  miraculousness  a 
profound scholar of the principles of religion sees will not be the same as that seen by 
an authoritative interpreter of the secondary matters of the Shari‘a sees; and so on. I 
am not able to show in detail all these different aspects; my compre 

 

 

 

466

hension cannot encompass them; my view falls short of them. For this reason only ten 
classes were explained and the rest were  alluded to briefly. Now, of those, two that 
were inadequately described in The Miracles of Muhammad although they needed to 
be elucidated, were the following: 

The First Class  is the uneducated mass of people, whom we call “the  listening 
class;” they only  listen to the Qur’an, understanding  its miraculousness by means of 
their ears. They say: “The Qur’an, which I hear, does not resemble any other books, 
so  it  must  either  be  inferior  to  all  of  them,  or  superior.  No  one  could  say  that  it  is 
inferior, nor have they said it, nor could the Devil even say it. So it must be superior 
to  all  of them.”  It was  written  briefly  like  this  in  the  Eighteenth  Sign  and  is  further 
explained  in  the  First  Topic  of  the  Twenty-Sixth  Letter,  called  A  Dispute  with  the 
Devil, which illustrates and proves that class’s understanding of the miraculousness. 

The  Second  Class  is  “the  seeing  class.”  That  is  to  say,  it  is  claimed  in  the 
Eighteenth  Sign  that  an  aspect  of  the  Qur’an’s  miraculousness  which  may  be  seen 
with the eyes looks to the uneducated common people or to materialists whose minds 
see no further than their eyes. This claim needs much explanation in order to elucidate 
and  prove  it.  It  was  not  explained  there  due  to  an  important  instance  of  dominical 
wisdom  which  only  now  we  understand.  Only  a  few  very  minor  particulars  were 
pointed  out.  The  wisdom  in  in  this  is  now  understood  and  we  are  certain  its 
postponement was preferable. In order to facilitate this class’s understanding, we had 
a  Qur’an  written  that  shows  this  observable  aspect,  one  of  the  forty  aspects  of  its 
miraculousness. 

 [The remaining matters of this Third Section together with the Fourth 
Section are about coincidences (tevâfukat). They have been included in 
the  Index  and  not  repeated  here.  Included  here  are  only  a  reminder 
concerning the Fourth Section and its Third Point.] 

R e m i n d e r : One hundred and sixty verses were written in explanation of the 
important point concerning the word “Messenger.” In addition to these verses having 
a glorious quality, they form a Qur’anic supplication for those who want to memorize 
or recite different verses since they prove and complete one another with regard to the 
meaning  and  their  meanings  are  very  profound. In  degree,  eloquence  and beauty  of 
the  sixty-nine  verses  in  the  explanation  of  the  sublime  point  concerning  the  word 
“Qur’an” is also most wondrous and elevated. This may be recommended to our broth 

 

467

ers as a second Qur’anic supplication. In regard to the word “Qur’an,” it was present 
in the seven lines of the word, which included all of them with the exception of two, 
and since these latter had the meaning of qira’at, their remaining outside the pattern 
strengthened the point. As for the word “Messenger,” since the Suras most connected 
with the word are Sura Muhammad and Sura al-Fath, and since we  limited it to the 
lines of the word appearing in those two Suras, the instances of the word outside those 
have  not  been  included.  If  time  permits,  the  mysteries  these  hold  will  be  explained, 
God willing. 

The Third Point consists of four points. 

F i r s t  P o i n t 

The  word  “Allah”  is  mentioned  two  thousand  eight  hundred  and  six  times. 
Including in the Bismillah’s (In the Name of God’s), the word “Merciful (Rahman)” 
one  hundred  and  fifty-nine;  “Compassionate  (Rahim),”  two  hundred  and  twenty; 
“Forgiving  (Ghafur),”  sixty-one;  “Sustainer  (Rabb),”  eight  hundred  and  forty-six; 
“Wise  (Hakim),”  eighty-six;  “Knowing  (‘Alim),”  one  hundred  and  twenty-six; 
“Powerful (Qadir),” thirty-one; the “He (Hu)” in “There is no god but He,” twenty-six 
times.1  The  number of  times  the  word  “Allah”  is  repeated  contains  many  mysteries 
and  subtle  points.  For  instance,  the  number  of  times  “Merciful,”  “Compassionate,” 
“Forgiving,”  and  “Wise,”  which  are  the  most  mentioned  after  “Allah”  and 
“Sustainer,” are repeated together with the word “Allah,” is equal to half the number 
of the Qur’an’s verses. And repetitions of “Allah,” together with “Sustainer,” which is 
mentioned instead of the word “Allah,” again equal half the number of the Qur’an’s 
verses.  The  word  “Sustainer”  is  mentioned  eight  hundred  and  forty-six  times,  but  if 
these  are  studied  carefully,  it  will  be  seen  that  around  five  hundred  of  them  are 
mentioned in place of the word “Allah,” while around two hundred are not. 

Also,  repetitions  of  “Allah” 

together  with  “Merciful,”  “Compassionate,” 
“Knowing,” and the “He” of the phrase “There is no god but He” are again equal in 
number  to  half  of  the  verses;  the  difference  is  only  four.  And  together  with  “All-
Powerful” instead of “He,” they again equal half the number of verses; the difference 
here  is  nine. There  are  numerous subtle points  in the total  number of time the word 
“Allah,” but for now we deem this point to be sufficient. 

                                                 
1 An important mystery is indicated by the total number of the Qur’an’s verses  being  six  thousand  
six  hundred  and  sixty-six,  and  on  the eighty-ninth page here the above-mentioned number of divine 
names being connected with the number six, but it has been left aside for now. 

 

468

S e c o n d  P o i n t  

This is in respect of the Suras, and it too contains many subtle points. It contains 

coincidences (tevâfukat) in a way that points to an order, intention, and will. 

In Sura al-Baqara, the number of instances of the word “Allah” and the number 
of  the  verses  is  the  same.  There  is  a  difference  of four, but  four  “He’s”  replace  the 
word “Allah,” like the “He” in “There is no god but He” and they correspond exactly. 
In  Sura  Al-i  ‘Imran,  again  the  word  “Allah”  and  the  number of verses  coincide and 
are equal. Only, “Allah” is mentioned two hundred and nine times and there are two 
hundred verses, making a difference of nine. But small differences do not mar the fine 
points of eloquence and literary merits such as these; an approximate coincidence  is 
enough.  The  total  number  of  verses  of  Suras  al-Nisa,  al-Ma’ida,  and  al-An‘am 
coincides  with  the  total  number  of  instances  of  the  word  “Allah:”  the  number  of 
verses  is  four  hundred  and  sixty-four,  and  the  number  of  instances  of  the  word 
“Allah” four hundred and sixty-one;  with the “Allah” of the Bismillahs, it coincides 
exactly. 

And  for  example,  the  number of  instances  of  the  word  “Allah”  in  the first  five 
Suras is twice the number of the word in Suras al-A‘raf, al-Anfal, al-Tawba, Yunus, 
and Hud. That is, the second five are half the first five. Then the number of instances 
of  the  word  in  the  following  suras,  Yusuf,  al-Ra‘d,  Ibrahim,  al-Hijr,  and  al-Nahl,  is 
half  that,  and  in  the  following  Suras,  al-Isra,  al-Kahf,  Maryam,  Ta.  Ha.,  al-Anbiya, 
and al-Hajj, it is again halved.2 And so it continues to decrease in approximately the 
same  ratio  in  the  following  groups  of.  five  Suras.  There  are,  however,  some 
differences  and deficiencies but they  cause  no harm in  such  stations of address. For 
example, some are one hundred and twenty-one, others are one hundred and twenty-
five, others are one hundred and fifty-four, and yet others are one hundred and fifty-
nine.  Then,  the  five  Suras  which  begin  with  Sura  al-Zukhruf  decrease to  an  eighth. 
And  in  the  five  beginning  with  Sura  al-Najm,  it  is  a  sixty-fourth,  but  this  is 
approximate.  Differences  arising  from  small  errors  do  not  harm  stations  of  address 
such  as  these.  The  subsequent  three  groups  of  five  short  Suras  contain  only  three 
instances each of the word “Allah.” And this shows that chance has not interfered at 
all  in  the  number of the  word;  the  numbers of  it  have  been  specified  in  accordance 
with wisdom and order. 

                                                 
2 A mystery was unfolded through this division into fives. With not one of us being aware of it, six 
Suras were written here. We have no doubt that outside our wills, and from the Unseen, the sixth was 
added here so that the important mystery concerning these halves should not be lost. 

 

469

T h e  T h i r d  P o i n t  is about the word “Allah” 

This concerns its relation to the pages and is as follows: 
The  number  of  instances  of  the  word  on  one  page  looks  to  that  page’s  reverse 
side, and that page sometimes looks to its facing page, and sometimes to the left-hand 
facing page and to the reverse face of the facing page. I studied a coincidence in my 
own  copy  of  the  Qur’an  and  observed  what  was  generally  a  very  fine  numerical 
relationship.  I  marked  them  in  my  copy.  Very  often  they  are  equal,  and  sometimes 
they are a half or a third. Their positioning tells of a wisdom, purpose, and order. 

F o u r t h  P o i n t   

This concerns coincidences on a single page. My brothers and I compared three 
or  four  different  copies  and  we  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  coincidences  were 
intended in all of them. However, since copyists for printed copies had different aims 
in  view, the  coincidences  lost  their  order to  a degree.  But  if  they  were  set  in  order, 
coincidences  would  become  apparent  to  the  number  of  the  two  thousand  eight 
hundred  and  six  instances  of  the  word  Allah  in  the  whole  Qur’an  with  only  rare 
exceptions. A  light of miraculousness  shines in this, because the  human mind could 
not encompass a page as extensive as this and interfere in it. And the hand of chance 
could not reach up to such a situation, so full of meaning and wisdom. 

We are having a new Qur’an written in order to demonstrate this Fourth Point to 
a degree, which together with preserving the pages and lines of the most widely used 
copies of the Qur’an, will set in order the places that have lost their order due to the 
slackness  of  calligraphers,  and  will  display  the  true  order  of  the  coincidences,  God 
willing. Indeed, it was displayed. 

O God! O Revealer of the Qur’an!  For the sake of the Qur’an, allow us to 
understand its mysteries so long as the spheres revolve. And grant blessings 
and peace to the one to whom You revealed the Qur’an, and to all his Family 
and Companions. Amen. 

 

470

The Fifth Section, 
which is the Fifth Treatise 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
God is the Light of the heavens and the earth.(24:35) 

While in a spiritual state during the month of Ramadan, I perceived one light of 
the many luminous mysteries of this light-filled verse; I saw it as though from afar. It 
was like this: 

I had a vision of the heart and imagination which afforded me the conviction that, 

as in the famous supplication of Uways al-Qarani, 

O God! You are our Sustainer, for we are mere slaves; we are powerless to 
sustain and raise ourselves. That is to say, the One who sustains us is You! 
And it is You who is the Creator, for we are creatures, we are being made! 
And it is You who is the Provider, for we are in need of provision, we have 
no power!, 

all living creatures are offering supplications to Almighty God, and that a divine name 
illuminates each of the eighteen thousand worlds. It was like this: 

I saw that within this world are thousands of worlds enwrapped in veil after veil, 
one within the other like a rose-bud with numerous petals. As each veil was unfolded 
I saw another world. It was like that depicted by the verse following the Light Verse:  

Or  [the  unbelievers’  state]  is  like  the  depths  of  darkness  in  a  vast  deep 
ocean,  overwhelmed  with  billow  topped  with  billow,  topped  by  [dark] 
clouds; depths of darkness, one above  the other; if a  man  stretches  out his 
hand, he can hardly see it; for any to whom God gives not light, there is no 
light;(24:40) 

it  appeared  to  me  in  darkness,  desolation,  and  terrible  blackness.  Suddenly,  the 
manifestation  of  a  divine  name  appeared  like  a  refulgent  light,  illuminating  it. 
Whichever veil was folded back another world appeared before my mind. But while 
appearing dark due to heedlessness, a divine name would be manifested like the sun, 
filling that world with light from top to bottom. And so on. This journey of the heart 
and imagination continued for a long time. In short: 

 

471

When I saw the animal world it appeared to me as truly dark and grievous due to 
the animals’ endless needs and acute hunger, and their weakness and impotence. Then 
suddenly the name of Most Merciful rose like the shining sun in the sign of (that is, 
meaning)  Provider,  gilding  that  world  from  top  to  bottom  with  the  radiance  of  its 
mercy. 

Then  within  the  animal  world  I  beheld  another  world  in  which  young  and 
offspring were struggling in their weakness, helplessness, and need within a grievous 
darkness that would fill anyone with pity. Suddenly the  name of All-Compassionate 
rose  in  the  sign  of  clemency,  illuminating  that  world  in  so  beautiful  and  sweet  a 
fashion that it transformed the complaint, pity, and tears of sorrow into joy, happiness, 
and tears of pleasurable thanks.  

Then a further veil was lifted, as though revealing a cinema screen, and the world 
of man appeared to me. But it appeared to be so dark, so oppressive, so terrible that in 
anguish I cried out “Alas!” For I saw that men had desires and hopes that stretched to 
eternity,  and  thoughts  and  imaginings  that  encompassed  the  universe,  and  a 
disposition  and  abilities  that  most  earnestly  yearned  for  eternity  and  everlasting 
happiness and Paradise, and wants and needs that were directed towards endless goals 
and  aims.  Yet  they  were  weak  and  impotent,  and  exposed  to  the  attacks  of 
innumerable calamities  and  enemies;  they  lived  tumultuous  lives  for  a brief  span  in 
the greatest hardship and difficulties. Amid the continuous tribulations of decline and 
separation, a most grievous state for the heart, they were  looking towards the grave, 
which for the heedless and neglectful is the door to everlasting darkness; singly and in 
groups, they were being cast into that dark well. 

The moment I saw this world in the midst of the darkness, my  heart, spirit, and 
mind, and all my human faculties, indeed, all the particles of my being, were ready to 
weep and cry out in pain. But suddenly Almighty God’s name of All-Just rose in the 
sign of All-Wise, the name of Most Merciful rose in the sign of Munificent, the name 
of All-Compassionate rose in the sign of (that is, meaning) All-Forgiving, the name of 
Resurrector  in  the  sign  of  Inheritor,  the  name  of  Giver  of  Life  rose  in  the  sign  of 
Bountiful, and the name of Sustainer rose in the sign of Owner. They gilded and filled 
with light many worlds within the world of humanity. Opening up windows onto the 
luminous world of the hereafter, they scattered lights over the dark human world. 

Then  another,  vast,  veil  was  folded  back  and  the  world  of  the  earth  appeared. 
Philosophy’s dark laws of science showed a terrifying world to the imagination. The 
situation appeared to me of wretched humankind  

 

472

journeying  through  infinite  space  on  the  aged  earth,  which  covers  in  one  year  a 
distance  of  twenty-five  thousand  years  moving  seventy  times  faster  than  a  cannon-
ball, and whose inside is in a state of upheaval ever ready to split up and disintegrate. 
My head started spinning and my eyes darkened. Then suddenly the names of Creator 
of the Heavens and the Earth, All-Powerful, All-Knowing, Sustainer, Allah, Sustainer 
of the Heavens and the Earth, and Subduer of the Sun and Moon rose in the signs of 
Mercy, Tremendousness, and Dominicality. They illuminated that world so that I saw 
the  globe  of  the  earth  to  be  a  safe  liner,  well-ordered,  subjugated,  perfect,  and 
agreeable, all decked out for voyages of pleasure and trade. 

In  Short:  Each  of  the  thousand  and  one  divine  names  turned  towards  the 
universe appeared like a sun, illuminating a world and the worlds within that world, 
and  with  respect  to  divine  oneness  (ehadiyet),  within  the  manifestation  of  each  of 
them the manifestations of the rest of the names appeared to a degree. Then my heart 
espied  a  different  light  behind  all  the  darknesses  and  felt  an  appetite  for  travel.  It 
wanted to mount the imagination and rise to the heavens. At that point, a further, most 
extensive, veil was folded back, and my heart entered the world of the heavens. It saw 
that the stars larger than the earth, which appeared as twinkling smiles, were spinning 
and journeying faster than the earth one within the other. If any of them confused its 
motion it would clash with another causing  such  a blast the universe would explode 
causing  the  whole  world to  fall  apart.  They  were  scattering  fire,  not light, and were 
regarding  me  not  with  smiles,  but  with  savagery. I saw  the  heavens  within  endless, 
all-enveloping,  empty,  awesome,  terrifying  darkness.  I  was  sorry  a  thousand  times 
over that I had come. Suddenly the names of Lord of the Heavens and the Earth and 
Sustainer of the Angels and Spirits appeared with their manifestations in the  sign of 
“He has subjected the sun and the moon,”(13:2, etc.) and, “And We adorned the lower 
heaven with lights.”(41:12) The stars, which in accordance with the former meaning 
had  collapsed  into  darkness,  each  received  a flash  from  that  mighty  light  and  lit  up 
that  world  of  the  heavens  like  shining  electric  lamps.  The  heavens  too,  which  had 
seemed  empty  and  uninhabited,  filled  with  angels  and  spirit  beings.  I  saw  that  the 
suns and moons, which were in motion like an army of the Monarch of Pre-Eternity 
and Post-Eternity – one of His innumerable armies – were with their lofty manoeuvres 
displaying  the  majesty  and  magnificent  dominicality  of  that  All-Glorious  Sultan.  I 
declared  with  all  my  strength,  and  had  it  been  possible  with  all  the  particles  of  my 
being, and if they had listened to me with the tongues of all creatures: 

 

473

God is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The parable of His Light is as 
if there were a niche and within it a lamp; the lamp enclosed by glass; the 
glass as it were a brilliant star; lit from a blessed tree, an olive, neither of 
the East nor of the West, whose oil is well-nigh luminous, though fire scarce 
touched it; Light upon Light! God guides to His Light whom He will.(24:35) 

I  recited  this  verse  in  the  name  of  all  creatures.  Then  I  returned,  descended  to  the 
earth,  and  awoke.  “All  praise  be  to  God  for  the  light  of  belief  and  the  Qur’an,”  I 
exclaimed. 

 

474

The Sixth Section, 
which is the Sixth Treatise 

 [This  was  written  to  warn  students  and  servants  of  the  All-Wise 
Qur’an, so that they should not be deceived.] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
And  incline  not  towards  those  who  do  wrong,  or  the  Fire  will  seize 
you.(11:113) 

God willing, this Sixth Section will confound six stratagems of satans among jinn 

and men, and block up six of their ways of attack. 

FIRST STRATAGEM 

In consequence of the instruction they have received from satans among the jinn, 
human satans want to deceive, by exciting the desire  for rank and position, the self-
sacrificing servants of the party of the Qur’an, and to make them give up their sacred 
service and elevated jihad of the word. It is as follows: 

Present  in  most  people  is  a hypocritical  desire  to  be seen  by  people  and  hold  a 
position  in  the  public  view,  which  is  ambition  for  fame  and  acclaim,  and  self-
advertisement;  it  is  present  to  a  lesser  or  greater  extent  in  all  those  who  seek  this 
world. The desire to accomplish this ambition will drive a person to sacrifice his life 
even. Such ambition is exceedingly dangerous for those who seek the  hereafter, and 
even for those who seek this world it is a rough road. It is also the source of many bad 
morals and is man’s greatest weakness. A person only has to gratify this ambition to 
gain control over someone and draw him to himself; it ties the man to him, and he is 
overcome. My greatest fear for my brothers is that the atheists may take advantage of 
this weak  vein of theirs. It  has caused me much thought. For they did attract in this 
way  some  unfortunates  who  were  not  truly  friends, drawing  them  into  a  dangerous 
situation.1 

                                                 
1Those unfortunates think: “Our hearts are together with Ustad,” and suppose themselves to be in no 
danger. But someone who gives support to the atheists’ movement and is carried away by their 
propaganda, and perhaps unknowingly is used in spying activities, says: “My heart is pure and loyal to 
Ustad’s way,” resembles the following example: while performing the obligatory prayers, a person 
cannot hold his wind and expels it, and his prayer is invalidated. When he is told that his prayers are 
invalid, he replies: “Why should they be? My heart is pure.” 

 

475

My  brothers  and  friends  in  the  service  of  the  Qur’an!  Say  the  following  to  the 
secret  agents  of  the  cunning  ‘worldly,’  or  the  propagandists  of  the  people  of 
misguidance, or the students of Satan, for they all try to deceive you by exciting the 
desire  for  rank:  “Firstly,  divine  pleasure,  the  favours  of  the  Merciful  One,  and 
dominical  acceptance  are  a  position  so  high  that  beside  them  the  attention  and 
admiration of men are worth virtually nothing. To receive divine mercy is sufficient. 
The regard of men is acceptable in that it is the reflection and shadow of the regard of 
divine  mercy;  otherwise  it  is  not  desirable.  For  it  is  extinguished  at the  door  of the 
grave, so is worth nothing!” 

If the desire for rank and position cannot be silenced and eliminated, it should be 
directed  towards  something  else:  as  in  the  following  comparison,  the  emotion  may 
have  a  licit  side;  if  it  is  for  reward  in  the  hereafter,  or  with  the  intention  of  being 
prayed for, or for making one’s work effective. 

For  example,  at  a  time  Aya  Sophia  Mosque  is  filled  with  eminent  and  blessed 
people,  virtuous  and  excellent,  one  or  two  idle  youths  and  immoral  loafers  are 
hanging  around  the  entrance,  while  next  to  the  windows  a  few  Europeans  are 
watching for amusement. A man enters the mosque and joins the congregation, then 
recites a passage from the Qur’an beautifully in a fine voice; the gazes of thousands of 
the  people  of  truth  are  turned  on  him  and  they  gain  reward  for  him  through  their 
regard  and  prayers.  This  does  not please  the idle  youths  and  heretic  loafers  and the 
one  or  two Europeans.  If  when  the  man  had  entered the  blessed  mosque  and  joined 
the  huge  congregation,  he  had  shouted  out  lewd  songs,  and  danced  and  jumped 
around, it would have made the idle  youths laugh, have pleased the dissolute loafers 
since it encouraged immorality, and made the Europeans smile mockingly, since they 
are gratified at seeing any faults in Islam. But it would have attracted looks of disgust 
and contempt from the vast and blessed congregation; in its view, the man would have 
fallen to the very lowest of the low. 

Exactly like this example, the World of Islam and Asia is a huge mosque, and the 
people of belief and truth within it are the respected congregation in the mosque. The 
idle  youths  are  the childish  sycophants.  The  dissolute  loafers  are  those  villains  who 
follow Europe and have no nation or religion. While the European spectators are the 
journalists who spread  

 

476

the  ideas of the Europeans. All Muslims, especially the virtuous and perfected ones, 
have a place  in the mosque according to their degree; they  are  seen and attention  is 
paid  to  them.  If  they  perform  actions  and  works  as  taught  by  the  injunctions  and 
sacred truths the All-Wise Qur’an in accordance with the sincerity and divine pleasure 
which are a fundamental of Islam, and if through the tongue of disposition they recite 
Qur’anic verses, they will then be included in the prayer: “O God, grant forgiveness 
to  all  believing  men  and  to  all  believing  women,”  which  is  constantly  uttered  by 
everyone  in  the  World  of  Islam.  They  will  have  a  share  of  it  and  will  become 
connected to all the others in brotherly fashion. However, the value of this will not be 
apparent  to  some  of  the  people  of  misguidance  who  are  like  harmful  beasts  and  to 
some  idiots  who  are  like  bearded  children.  If  a  man  disowns  all  his  forefathers, the 
source of honour, and all the past, the cause of pride, and abandons in the  spirit the 
luminous  highway  of  his  righteous  predecessors,  which  they  considered  to  be  their 
point of support, and if he follows his own whims and passions hypocritically seeking 
fame and following innovations, he will fall to the very lowest position in the view of 
all  the  people  of  truth  and  belief.  In  accordance  with:  “Beware  the  insight  of  the 
believer, for he sees with the light of God,”2 however common and ignorant a believer 
may be, even if his mind does not realize it, his heart looks coldly and in disgust on 
such boastful, selfish men. 

And so, the man carried away by love of position and rank and obsessed by the 
desire for fame – the second man, descends to the very lowest of the low in the view 
of that numberless congregation. And he gains a temporary, inauspicious position  in 
the view of a few insignificant, mocking, raving loafers. In accordance with the verse,  

Friends  on 
righteous,(43:67)  

that  Day  will  be 

foes,  one 

to  another  –  except 

the 

he  will  find  a  few  false  friends  who  will  be  harmful  in  this  world,  torment  in  the 
Intermediate Realm, and enemies in the hereafter.  

As for the first man, even if he does not expunge the desire for position from his 
heart, on condition he takes sincerity and divine pleasure as his guiding principles and 
does not make rank and position his goal, he will attain a sort of spiritual rank, and a 
glorious one at that, which will perfectly satisfy that desire of his. The man will lose 
something  insignificant,  very  insignificant, and find in place of  it many,  very many, 
valuable and  

                                                 
2 Tirmidhi, Tafsir Sura, 156; Abu Nu’aym, Hilyat al-Awliya, iv, 94; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawa’id, 
x, 268; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 42. 

 

477

harmless things. Indeed, he will chase away a few snakes and find numerous blessed 
creatures; he will become close friends with them. Or he will ward off stinging wild 
hornets  and  attract  blessed  bees,  the  sherbert-sellers  of  mercy.  He  will  eat  honey  at 
their hand, and through their prayers find friends from all parts of the Islamic world 
through whom his spirit will receive effulgences like the water of Kawthar, and these 
will pass to his book of good deeds. 

At one time, when through perpetrating a great wrong due to the desire for fame, 
a little man who was occupying a  high worldly position became a laughing-stock  in 
the eyes of the World of Islam, I spoke to him teaching him the meaning of the above 
comparison;  I  hit  him  over  the  head  with  it.  He  was  badly  shaken,  but  because  I 
myself had not been saved from the desire for rank and position, my warning did not 
arouse him. 

SECOND STRATAGEM 

One  of  the  strongest  and  most  basic  emotions  in  man  is  the  sense  of  fear. 
Scheming  oppressors  profit  greatly  from  the  vein  of  fear.  They  restrain  the 
pusillanimous  with  it.  The  agents  of  the  worldly  and  propagandists  of  the  people  of 
misguidance  take  advantage  of this  vein  of  the  common people  and of  the  religious 
scholars  in  particular.  They  frighten  them  and  excite  their  groundless  fears.  For 
example,  in  order  to  scare  a  coward  who  is  on  a  roof  and  put  him  in  danger,  a 
scheming man shows him something which he supposes is harmful; he excites his fear 
and  draws  him  gradually  towards  the  edge  of  the  roof;  then  he  makes  him  fall  and 
break his  neck. In exactly the  same way, they make people sacrifice most important 
things due to most unimportant fears. Trying to avoid a mosquito bite, they flee into 
the dragon’s mouth. 

One time, an eminent person – May God have mercy on him – was frightened of 
climbing  into  a  rowing-boat.  One  evening,  we  walked  together  to  the  Bridge  in 
Istanbul. We had to board a boat; there was no carriage and we were going to Eyüp 
Sultan. I  insisted. He said: “I’m  frightened. Perhaps it’ll  sink!” I said to him: “How 
many boats do you reckon there are, here on the Golden Horn?” He replied: “Perhaps 
a thousand.” So I asked him: “How many boats sink in a year?” He said: “One or two. 
Perhaps  none  at  all.”  I  asked  him:  “How  many  days  are  there  in  a  year?”  “Three 
hundred  and  sixty,”  he  replied.  So  I  said  to  him:  “The  possibility  of  sinking,  which 
provokes these groundless fears and makes  you anxious, is one in three hundred and 
sixty thousand. Someone who is frightened at such a possibility is not a human being, 
he couldn’t even be an animal!” Then I asked him: “How long do you reckon you will 
live?” He replied: “I  

 

478

am old; perhaps I’ll live another ten years.” So I said to him: “The appointed hour of 
death is secret, so we could die any day. In which case, you might die on any day of 
the three thousand six  hundred. You see, there is  a one in three thousand possibility 
that  you might die today rather than one  in three  hundred thousand like the boat; so 
tremble  and  weep,  and  write  your  will!”  He  came  to  his  senses,  and  I  got  him, 
trembling,  to  board  the  boat.  When  on  board,  I  told  him:  “Almighty  God  gave  the 
sense of fear to preserve life, not to destroy it! He did not give life so that it would be 
burdensome, difficult, painful, and torment. If fear is caused by a possibility of one in 
two, three, or four, or even one  in five or six,  it  is a precautionary  fear and may be 
licit.  But  to  fear  a  possibility  of  one  in  twenty,  thirty,  or  forty,  is  groundless,  and 
makes life torture!” 

My brothers! If those who toady to the atheists attack you by frightening you into 
giving up your sacred jihad of the word, say to them: “We are the party of the Qur’an. 
According to the verse, 

We  have,  without  doubt,  sent  down  the  Message;  and  We  will  assuredly 
guard it,(15:9) 

we are in the citadel of the Qur’an. The verse, 

For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs(3:173) 

is  a  firm  bastion  surrounding  us.  Utilizing  fear  at  a  one  in  thousands  possibility  of 
some  minor  harm  coming  to  our  fleeting  transient  lives  here,  you  cannot  drive  us 
through our own wills down a way on which there is a hundred per cent possibility of 
its  causing  thousandfold  harm  to  our  eternal  lives!”  And  say  too:  “Is  there  anyone 
who has suffered harm due to Said Nursi, our friend in the service of the Qur’an and 
Master and foreman in running this sacred work, or from people of truth like us who 
are  his  companions  on  the  way  of  truth?  Is  there  anyone  who  has  been  caused  any 
trouble at the hand of his close students, that we might be caused it too? So should we 
be  anxious  at  the  possibility  of  suffering  it?  This  brother  of  ours  has  thousands  of 
friends and brothers of the hereafter. Although for twenty to thirty years he played an 
influential role in the social life of this world, we have not heard that a single of his 
brothers suffered harm because of him, and at that time he was brandishing the club 
of politics. Now he holds the light of reality rather than the club. For sure, long ago 
they mixed him up in the Thirty-First of March Incident and they crushed some of his 
friends,  but  it  later  became  clear  that  others  had  instigated  the  affair.  His  friends 
suffered misfortune, not because of him but because of his enemies. Moreover, at that 
time he saved very many of his friends. So satans like  

 

479

you shouldn’t get it into their minds to make us throw away an eternal treasury out of 
fear at a danger the possibility of  which  is  not one  in  a thousand but in thousands.” 
You should say that and hit those toadies of the people of misguidance in the mouth, 
and drive them away! And tell them this: 

“And if the possibility of death is not one in hundreds of thousands but a hundred 
per cent probability, if we have a jot of sense, we will not be frightened and abandon 
him and flee!” For it has been seen through repeated experiences, and it is seen, that 
the calamity which is visited on those who betray their elder brother or their Master in 
times  of  danger,  strikes  them  first.  And  they  are  punished  mercilessly  and  they  are 
looked  down  upon  contemptuously.  Both  physically  dead  and  their  spirits  abased, 
they are in effect dead. Those who torment them feel no pity for them, for they say: 
“Since  they  betrayed  their  Master  who  was  loyal  and  kind  to  them,  they  must  be 
completely despicable and deserve contempt, not pity!” 

Yes, the reality is this. Also, if a tyrannical, unscrupulous man throws someone to 
the ground and stands over him certain to crush his head with his foot, and the man on 
the ground kisses that savage oppressor’s foot, due to his abasement his heart will be 
crushed before his head, and his spirit will die before his body. He will lose his head, 
and  his  self-respect  and  pride  will  be  destroyed.  By  displaying  weakness  before  the 
savage  tyrant  without  conscience,  he  encourages  him  to  crush  him.  But  if  the 
oppressed man spits in the tyrant’s face, he will save his heart and his spirit, and his 
body will be a wronged martyr. Yes, spit in the shameless faces of the oppressors! 

the  Anglican  Church, 

the  head  clergyman  of 

One time when the British had destroyed the guns on the Bosphorus and occupied 
Istanbul, 
the  main  religious 
establishment  of  that  country,  asked  six questions  of  the  Shaikh  al-Islam’s  Office.  I 
was a member of the Darü’l-Hikmeti’l-Islamiye at the time. They asked me to answer 
them, saying that they wanted a six-hundred-word reply to their six questions. But I 
told them: “I’ll answer them not with six hundred words, or even with six words, or 
even a single word, but with a mouthful of spit! For you can see that government; the 
moment it set foot on our Bosphorus, its clergyman arrogantly asked us six questions. 
Faced  with  this,  we  should  spit  in  his  face.  So  spit  in  the  pitiless  faces  of  those 
tyrants!” And now I say: 

My brothers! At a time a tyrannical government like the British had occupied us 
the protection of the Qur’an was enough  for me, although  it was a hundred per cent 
certain that  harm would come to me from confronting them  in this way through the 
tongue of the press, so it is definitely a  

 

480

hundred times more sufficient for you in the face of the harm that may come to you at 
the hand of these insignificant bullies, which is only a one in a hundred possibility. 

Furthermore,  my  brothers!  Most  of  you  have  done  your  military  service.  Any 
who haven’t, have certainly heard this. And any who haven’t heard it, let them hear it 
now  from  me:  “The  people  who  receive  most  wounds  are  those  who  abandon  their 
trenches and run away. While the people who receive  fewest wounds are those who 
persevere in their trenches!” 

The allusive meaning of the verse, 

Say: “The death from which you flee will truly overtake you”(62:8) 

shows that those who run away are more likely to meet death through their flight! 

THIRD SATANIC STRATAGEM 

They hunt many people through greed. 
We have proved in many treatises with certain proofs that have issued forth from 
the clear verses of the All-Wise Qur’an that licit sustenance comes not in accordance 
with  power  and  will,  but  proportionately  to  powerlessness  and  want.  There  are 
numerous signs, indications, and evidences demonstrating this truth. For instance: 

Trees,  which  are  animate  beings  of  a  sort and  in  need  of  sustenance,  remain  in 
their places and their sustenance comes hastening to them. While since animals chase 
after it greedily, they are not nurtured as perfectly as trees. 

Also,  although  fishes  are  the  most  stupid  and  powerless  of  the  animals  and are 
found  in  sand,  their  being  the  best  nourished  and  generally  appearing  fat  while 
intelligent and capable animals like the monkey and fox are weak and thin from their 
scanty sustenance, shows that need is the means of sustenance, not power. 

Also, the  fine  sustenance of all  young, whether  human or animal, and milk, the 
delicate gift of the treasury of mercy, being bestowed on them in an unexpected way 
out of compassion for their weakness and impotence, and the difficult circumstances 
of  wild  animals,  show  that  impotence  and  want  are  the  means  of  licit  sustenance 
rather than intelligence and power. 

Also, among the nations of the world there is none that pursues sustenance more 
than the Jewish nation, which is notorious for its intense greed. But they have suffered 
more  than  any  from  poor  livelihoods  amid  degradation  and  poverty.  Even  the  rich 
among them  live  in  lowly  fashion. In any event,  the possessions they  have acquired 
by such illicit means as usury do not comprise licit sustenance that it might refute our 
discussion here. 

 

481

Also, the poverty of many literary figures and scholars, and the wealth and riches 
of many stupid people show that the means of attracting sustenance is not intelligence 
and power, but impotence and want; it is submitting to God while relying on Him, and 
supplication by word, state, and deed. 

The verse, 

For God is He Who gives [all] sustenance, Lord of Power, and Steadfast [for 
ever],(51:58) 

proclaims this truth, and is a powerful, firm proof of this assertion of ours, which all 
plants  and  animals  and  young  recite.  Every  group  of  creature  that  seeks  sustenance 
recites this verse through the tongue of disposition. 

Since sustenance is appointed and bestowed and it is Almighty God who gives it, 
and  since  He  is  both  All-Compassionate  and  Munificent,  those  who  degrade 
themselves by making  illicit  gains in such a way as to cast aspersions on His mercy 
and insult His munificence, and give their consciences and even certain sacred matters 
as bribes and accept things which are unlawful and inauspicious – they should ponder 
over just what compounded lunacy this is. 

Yes,  ‘the  worldly’  and  especially  the  people  of  misguidance  do  not  give  away 
their  money  cheaply;  they  sell  it  at  a  high  price.  Sometimes  something  which  may 
help a little towards a  year of worldly life is the means of destroying infinite eternal 
life. And with that vile  greed, the person draws divine wrath on himself and tries to 
attract the pleasure of the people of misguidance. 

Yes, my brothers! If those who toady to ‘the worldly’ and the dissemblers among 
the  misguided  lay  hold  of  you  due  to  this  weak  vein  in  human  nature,  think  of  the 
above truth and take this poor brother of  yours as an example. I assure  you with all 
my strength that contentment and frugality ensure your life and sustenance more than 
does a salary. As for any unlawful money that is given  you, they will want a price a 
thousand times higher in return. It may also hinder your service of the Qur’an, which 
may  open  for  you  an  everlasting  treasury,  or  it may  make  you  slack  in  that  service. 
And that would be such a  loss and emptiness that even  if they  gave  you a thousand 
salaries every month, they could not fill its place. 

Warning:  The  people  of  misguidance  are  not  able  to  defend  themselves  and 
reply to the truths of belief and the Qur’an which we take from the All-Wise Qur’an 
and  disseminate,  therefore,  through  intrigue  and  dissembling  they  employ  snares  of 
deception and wile. They want to deceive my friends through the desire for position, 
greed,  and  fear,  and  to  refute  me  by  ascribing  certain  things  to  me.  We  always  act 
positively in our sacred service, but  

 

482

unfortunately, sometimes the duty of removing the obstacles in the way of some good 
matter impels us to act negatively. 

It  is  because  of  this  that  I  am  warning  my  brothers  concerning  the  above-
mentioned  three  points,  in  the  face  of  the  cunning  propaganda  of  the  dissemblers.  I 
am trying to rebuff the attacks that are levelled at them. 

The most significant attack now is at my person. They say: “Said is a Kurd. Why 
do you show him so much respect, and follow him?” So I am forced to mention the 
fourth satanic stratagem in the language of the Old Said although I do not want to, in 
order to silence such villains. 

FOURTH SATANIC STRATAGEM  

In  order  to  deceive  my  brothers  and  excite  their  nationalist  feelings,  certain 
irreligious people who occupy high positions attack me with their propaganda. At the 
promptings of Satan and suggestions of the people of misguidance, they say: “You are 
Turks.  Thanks  be  to  God,  among  the  Turks  are  religious  scholars  and  people  of 
perfection of every  sort. Said is a Kurd. To work along with someone who does not 
share your nationality is unpatriotic.” 

T h e  A n s w e r : You miserable person without religion! All praise be to God, I 
am a Muslim. At all times there are three  hundred and fifty million members of my 
sacred nation. I seek refuge with God a hundred thousand times from sacrificing for 
the idea of racialism and negative nationalism three hundred and fifty million brothers 
who  enjoy  an  eternal  brotherhood  and  who  help  me  with  their  prayers  and  among 
whom  are  the  vast  majority  of  Kurds.  And  I  seek  refuge  with God  from  gaining  in 
place of those innumerable blessed brothers a few who have embarked on a way that 
is without religion or belongs to no school of law, who bear the name of Kurd and are 
reckoned to belong to the Kurdish people. O you without religion! There would have 
to have been some idiots like you who would abandon the everlasting brotherhood of 
a luminous beneficial community of three hundred and fifty million true brothers, to 
gain the brotherhood – which even in this world is without benefit – of a handful of 
Hungarian infidels or Europeanized Turks who have  lost their religion. Since, in the 
Third Matter of the Twenty-Sixth Letter we have shown together with the evidences 
the nature of negative nationalism and its harms, we refer  you to that, and here only 
explain  a  truth which  was  mentioned  briefly  at  the  end  of  the  Third  Matter.  It  is  as 
follows: 

I  say  to  those  pseudo-patriotic  irreligious  deviants  who  hide  under  the  veil  of 
Turkism and in reality are enemies of the Turks: “I am closely and truly connected by 
means of an eternal, true brotherhood with the nation of Islam, with the believers of 
this country who are called Turks. On account  

 

483

of Islam, I have a proud and partial love for the sons of this land who for close on a 
thousand  years  victoriously  carried  the  banner  of  the  Qur’an  to  every  corner  of  the 
world.  As  for  you,  you  pseudo-patriotic  imposters!  You  possess  in  a  way  that  will 
make  you  forget  the  true  national  pride  of  the  Turks,  a  metaphorical,  racial, 
temporary, and hateful brotherhood. I ask you: does the Turkish nation consist only of 
heedless  and  lustful  youths  between  the  ages  of  twenty  and  forty?  And  is  what  is 
beneficial for them and will serve them – as demanded by nationalist patriotism – an 
European  education  which  will  only  increase  their  heedlessness,  accustom  them  to 
immorality, and encourage them in what is forbidden? Is it to amuse them temporarily 
and so make them weep in old age? If nationalist patriotism consists of this, and this 
is progress and the happiness of life, yes, if you are a Turkist and nationalist like that, 
I flee  from such Turkism, and  you can flee  from me, too! If  you have even a  jot of 
patriotism, intelligence, and fairness, consider the following divisions of society and 
give me an answer. It is like this: 

The sons of this land known as the Turkish nation consist of six parts. The first 
part  are  the  righteous  and  the  pious.  The  second  are  the  sick  and  those  stricken  by 
disaster. The third are the elderly. The fourth are the children. The fifth are the poor 
and the weak. And the sixth  are the  young.  Are the first five  groups not Turks? Do 
they  have  no share of  nationalist patriotism? Is  it nationalist patriotism to vex those 
five groups, spoil their pleasure in life, and destroy those things that console them in 
order  to  give  drunken  enjoyment  to  the  sixth  group?  Or  is  it  enmity  towards  the 
nation? According to the rule “The word is with the majority,” that which harms the 
majority is inimical, not friendly! 

I ask you, is the greatest benefit of the believers and the pious, the first group, to 
be  found  in  a  European-type  civilization?  Or  is  it  to be  found  in  thinking  of  eternal 
happiness through the truths of belief,  in travelling the way of truth, for which they 
are  most  desirous,  and  in  finding  a  true  solace?  The  way  the  misguided  and  bogus 
patriots  like  you  have  taken  extinguishes  the  spiritual  lights  of  the  pious  people  of 
belief, destroys their true consolation, and shows death to be eternal nothingness and 
the grave to be the door to everlasting separation. 

Are the benefits of the disaster-stricken, the sick, and those who have despaired 
of  life,  who  form  the  second  group,  to  be  found  in  the  way  of  a  European-type, 
irreligious  civilization?  For  those  unfortunates  want  a  light,  a  solace.  They  want  a 
reward in return for the calamities they have suffered. They want to take their revenge 
on those who have oppressed them. They want to repulse the terrors at the door of the 
grave, which they  

 

484

are approaching. Through their false patriotism, people like you plunge a needle into 
the hearts of those unhappy victims of disaster who are much in need of compassion, 
soothing,  and  healing,  and  deserving  of  them.  You  hit  them  over  the  head!  You 
mercilessly  destroy  all  their  hopes!  You  cast  them  into  absolute  despair!  Is  this 
nationalist patriotism? Is that how you provide benefits for the nation? 

The  elderly,  the  third  group,  forms  a  third.  They  are  approaching  the  grave, 
drawing close to death, growing distant from the world, coming close to the hereafter. 
Are  their  benefits,  lights,  and  consolation  to  be  found  in  listening  to  the  cruel 
adventures of tyrants like Hulagu and Jenghiz? Do they have a place in your modern-
type movements which make the hereafter forgotten, bind a person to the world, are 
without result, and have the meaning of decline while being superficially progress? Is 
the light of the hereafter to be found in the cinema? Is true solace to be found in the 
theatre?  If  nationalist  patriotism  is  in  effect  to  slaughter  them  with  an  immaterial 
knife,  and  give  them  the  idea  that  “you  are  being  impelled  towards  everlasting 
nothingness,” and to transform the grave, which they consider to be the gate of mercy, 
into the dragon’s mouth, and to breathe in their ears: “You too will enter there!” – if, 
while  these  unhappy  elderly  people  want  respect  from  patriotism,  this  is  what  it 
consists of, I seek refuge with God a hundred thousand times from such patriotism! 

The  fourth  group  are  the  children.  They  want  kindness  from  nationalist 
patriotism; they await compassion. Also, in respect of their weakness, impotence, and 
powerlessness,  their  spirits  may  expand  through  knowing  a  compassionate  and 
powerful  Creator;  their  abilities  may  unfold  in  a  happy manner.  If  instilled  with  the 
reliance on God that springs from belief  and with the submission of  Islam that may 
withstand the awesome fears and worldly situations of the future, these innocents may 
look eagerly to life. Will this be achieved by teaching them things about the progress 
of civilization, with which they have little connection, and the principles of lightless 
materialist philosophy, which destroys their morale and extinguishes their spirits?  If 
man consisted only of an animal body and he had no mind in his head, perhaps these 
European  principles  which  you  fancifully  call  civilized  education  and  national 
education  could  have  afforded  these  innocent  children  some  worldly  benefit  in  the 
form  of  temporary  childish  amusement.  Since  they  will  be  cast  onto  the  surging 
tumult of life, and since they are human beings, they will certainly have far-reaching 
desires in their small hearts and large goals will be born in their little heads. Since the 
reality  is  thus,  compassion  requires  that  in  the  face  of  their  infinite  want  and 
impotence an extremely powerful support and inexhaustible place of  

 

485

recourse  are  placed  in  their  hearts,  and  these  are  belief  in  God  and  belief  in  the 
hereafter. This is kindness and compassion for them. It otherwise means slaughtering 
those wretched innocents with the drunkenness of nationalist patriotism, like a crazy 
mother  slaughtering  her  child  with  a  knife.  It  is  a  savage  cruelty  and  wrong,  like 
pulling out their brains and hearts and making them eat them to nourish their bodies. 

The  fifth  group  are  the  poor  and  the  weak.  The  poor,  who,  because  of  their 
poverty, suffer greatly at the heavy burdens of life, and the weak, who are grieved at 
life’s awesome upheavals – do they receive no share from nationalist patriotism? Is it 
to be found in the movements you have instituted under the name of European-style, 
unveiled,  Pharaoh-like  civilization,  which  only  increase  their  despair and  suffering? 
The salve for the wound of indigence may be found in the sacred pharmacy of Islam, 
not  in  the  idea  of  racialism.  The  weak  receive  no  strength  and  resistance  from  the 
philosophy of naturalism, which is dark, lacks consciousness, and is bound to chance; 
they may receive them from Islamic zeal and the sacred nationhood of Islam! 

The  sixth  group  is  the  youth.  If  the  youth  of  these  young  people  had  been 
perpetual, the wine you have given them to drink through negative nationalism would 
have  had  some  temporary  benefit  and  use.  But  when  they  painfully  come  to  their 
senses  as  they  advance  in  years,  when  they  awaken  from  that  sweet  sleep  in  the 
morning of old age, their distress at the pleasurable drunkenness of  youth will make 
them weep, and the passing of their pleasant dream will cause them much grief. It will 
make them exclaim: “Alas! Both my youth has gone and my life has departed, and I 
am  approaching  the  grave  bankrupt;  if  only  I  had  used  my  head!”  Is  the  share  of 
nationalist patriotism for this group to enjoy themselves briefly and temporarily, and 
to be made to weep regretfully for a very long time? Or is their worldly happiness and 
pleasure in life to be found in making their fleeting youth permanent through worship 
and  by  spending  that  fine,  sweet  bounty,  not  on  the  way  of  dissipation  but  on  the 
straight path in the form of offering thanks so as to gain eternal youth in the Realm of 
Bliss? You say, if you possess even a grain of intelligence! 

I n  S h o r t : If the Turkish nation consisted only of young people, and if their 
youth was perpetual, and they had no place other than this world, your European-style 
movement  under  the  screen  of  Turkism  might  have  been  counted  as  nationalist 
patriotism. You might have been able to say about me as someone who attaches little 
importance to the life of this world, considers racialism to be “the European disease,” 
tries to prevent young people pursuing illicit amusements and vices, and came into the  

 

486

world in another country: “He is a Kurd. Don’t follow him!” Perhaps you would have 
been right to say it. But since, as explained above, the sons of this land, who go under 
the name of Turks, consist of six groups, to cause harm to five of the groups and spoil 
their pleasure in life, and to afford a temporary, worldly pleasure the consequences of 
which are bad, to only one group, rather, to intoxicate them, is scarcely friendship to 
the Turkish nation; it is enmity. 

Yes, according to race, I am not counted as a Turk but I have worked with all my 
strength,  with  complete  eagerness,  in  compassionate  and  brotherly  fashion,  for  the 
groups  among  the  Turks  of  the  God-fearing,  the  disaster-stricken,  the  elderly,  the 
children, and the weak and the poor. I have worked for the young people as well, who 
are  the  sixth  group;  I  want  them  to  give  up any  unlawful  acts  that  will  poison  their 
worldly life, destroy their lives in the hereafter, and for one hour’s laughter, produce a 
year  of  weeping.  The  works  I  have  taken  from  the  Qur’an  and  published  in  the 
Turkish language – not only these six or seven years, but for twenty years – are there 
for everyone to see. Yes, praise be to God, through these works derived from the All-
Wise Qur’an’s mine of lights, the light is shown which the group of the elderly wants 
more  than  anything;  the  most  efficacious  remedies  for  the  disaster-stricken  and  the 
sick  are  pointed  out  in  the  sacred  pharmacy  of  the  Qur’an;  the  door  of  the  grave, 
which causes more thought to the elderly than anything else, is shown to be the door 
of mercy, not the door leading to execution. A truly powerful point of support in the 
face of the calamities and harmful things confronting the sensitive hearts of children, 
and a place of recourse to meet all their hopes and desires, have been extracted from 
the mine of the All-Wise Qur’an, and they have been demonstrated and profited from 
in fact. And the heavy obligations of life, which crush most the poor and weak, have 
been alleviated by the truths of belief of the All-Wise Qur’an. 

Thus, these five groups are five out of the six parts of the Turkish nation, and we 
are  working  for  their  benefit.  The  sixth  group  are  the  young  people.  We  feel  a 
powerful brotherhood with the good ones from among them. But between those like 
you  who  have  deviated  from  the  straight  path,  and  us,  there  is  no  friendship  at  all! 
Because we do not recognize as Turks those who embrace misguidance and want to 
abandon Islamic nationhood, which holds all the true causes of pride of the Turks. We 
consider  them  to  be  Europeans  hiding  behind  the  screen  of  Turkishness!  Because 
even  if  they  claim  to  be  Turkists  a  hundred  thousand  times  over,  they  could  not 
deceive  the  people  of  truth.  For  their  actions  and  works  would  give  the  lie  to  what 
they claim. 

 

487

O you who follow European ways! And you deviants who with your propaganda 
try to make my true brothers look coldly on me! How do you benefit this nation? You 
extinguish the lights of the first group, the pious and the righteous. You scatter poison 
on the wounds of the second group, who deserve kindness and care. You destroy the 
solace  of  the  third  group,  who  are  most  worthy  of  respect,  and  you  cast  them  into 
despair. You destroy completely the morale of the fourth group, who are truly in need 
of compassion, and you extinguish their true humanity. You make fruitless the hopes 
and  calls  for  help  of  the  fifth  group,  who  are  most  needy  for  assistance,  help,  and 
solace, and in their eyes, you turn life into something more ghastly than death. And to 
the sixth group, who need to be warned and to come to their senses, you give such a 
heady  wine  to  drink  in  the  sleep  of  youth  that  its  hangover  is  truly  grievous  and 
terrible. Is this your nationalist patriotism for the sake of which you sacrifice so many 
sacred  things?  Is  this  what  Turkism  has  to  offer  the  Turks?  I  seek  refuge  with  God 
from it a hundred thousand times! 

Sirs! I know that when you are defeated in the face of truth, you have recourse to 
force. In accordance with the fact that power lies in the truth, not in force, you can set 
fire  to  the  world  around  my  head,  but  this  head,  which  has  been  sacrificed  for  the 
truth  of  the  Qur’an,  will  not bow before  you.  And  I  tell  you  this,  that  not  a  limited 
number of people like  you who are in effect despised by the nation, but if thousands 
like  you  were physically  hostile  to  me,  I  would pay  them  no  attention,  attaching  no 
more  value  to  them  than  to  injurious  animals.  Because  what  can  you  do  to  me?  All 
you can do is to either bring my  life to an end, or spoil my work  and service. I am 
attached to  nothing  in  the  world apart  from  these. As  for the  appointed  hour  which 
befalls  life,  I  believe  as  certainly  as  witnessing  it  that  it  does  not  change,  it  is 
determined.  Since  this  is  so, if  I  die  as  a  martyr  on  the  way  of  truth,  I  do not  hang 
back from it, I await it longingly. Moreover, I am old and I find it hard to believe that 
I  shall  live  for  more  than  another  year.  To  transform  one  year’s  apparent  life  into 
everlasting eternal life through martyrdom is an exalted aim for people like me. As for 
my work and service, through His mercy, Almighty God has  given such brothers in 
the  service  of  belief  and  the  Qur’an  that  through  my  death  it  will  be  carried  out  in 
numerous centres instead of one. If my tongue is silenced by death, powerful tongues 
will speak in its place, continuing my work. I can even say that just as a single seed 
produces  the  life  of  a  shoot  by  entering  the  earth  and  dying,  and  a  hundred  seeds 
perform their duties in place of one, so I nourish  the  hope that my death will be the 
means to service greater than was my life! 

 

488

FIFTH SATANIC STRATAGEM  

Profiting from egotism, the supporters of the people of misguidance want to draw 
my  brothers  away  from  me.  Truly,  egotism  man’s  most  dangerous  vein.  It  is  his 
weakest  vein,  too.  They  can  make  people  do  terrible  things  by  encouraging  it.  My 
brothers! Beware, do not let them strike  you with egotism, do not let them hunt  you 
with it! You should know that this century the people of misguidance have mounted 
the  ego  and  are  galloping  through  the  valleys  of  misguidance.  The  people  of  truth 
have to give it up if they are to serve the truth. Even if a person is justified in making 
use of the ego, since he will resemble the others and they too will suppose he is self-
seeking like them, it will be an injustice to the service of the truth. In any event, the 
service of the Qur’an around which we are gathered does not accept the ‘I’, it requires 
the ‘we.’ It says: “Don’t say ‘I’, say ‘we.’” 

Of course, you have realized that this poor brother of yours did not set out with 
the ‘I’. And he did not make you serve it. Indeed, he showed himself to you as an ego-
free servant of the Qur’an. He does not care for himself and has made it his practice 
not  to  take  the  part  of  his  ego.  In  any  case,  he  has  proved  to  you  with  decisive 
evidence  that  the  works  that  have  been  presented  for  general  benefit  are  common 
property;  that  is,  they  have  issued  from  the  All-Wise  Qur’an.  Nobody  can  claim 
ownership of them egotistically. Even if, to suppose the impossible, I did claim them 
as my own because of my ego, as one of my brothers said: since this door of Qur’anic 
truth  has  been  opened,  the  scholars  and  those  seeking  perfection  should  not  look  at 
my  defects  and  insignificance  and  hold  back  from  following  me;  they  should  not 
deem  themselves  self-sufficient.  For  sure,  the  works  of  the  former  righteous  and 
exacting  religious  scholars  are  a  huge  treasury  sufficient  for  every  ill,  but  it 
sometimes  happens  that  a  key  holds  more  importance  than  the  treasury.  For  the 
treasury is closed and a key may open lots of treasuries. 

I reckon that those who are excessively egotistical in regard to their learning have 
understood  that  the  published  Words  are  each  keys  to  the  truths  of  the  Qur’an  and 
diamonds swords smiting those who try to deny those truths. The people of virtue and 
perfection  and  those  who  are  strongly  egotistical  in  regard  to  their  learning  should 
know that the students are students not of me but of the All-Wise Qur’an, and that I 
study along with them. 

If, to suppose the impossible, I claimed to be the master, since we have a way of 
saving all the classes of the people of belief – from the common people to the elite – 
from the doubts and scepticism to which they are  

 

489

exposed, then let those scholars either find an easier solution, or let them take the part 
of  our  solution  and  teach  it  and  support  it.  The  corrupt  religious  scholars  are  faced 
with  a  grave  threat;  religious  scholars  have  to  be especially  careful  at  this  time.  So 
suppose, like my enemies, that  I perform a service like this for the  sake of egotism. 
Since  a large number of people give up their egotism and gather  around a Pharaoh-
like man with complete loyalty for some worldly and national aim and carry out their 
work  in  complete  solidarity,  does  this  brother  of yours  not  have  the  right  to  ask  for 
your solidarity around the truths of belief and the Qur’an by giving up egotism, like 
those corporals of that worldly society, so long as he conceals his egotism? If even the 
greatest of the scholars among you were not to agree, wouldn’t they be in the wrong? 
My brothers! The most dangerous aspect of egotism in our work is jealousy. If it 
is not purely for God’s sake, jealousy interferes and spoils it. Just as one of a person’s 
hands cannot be jealous of the other, and  his  eye cannot envy  his  ear, and his  heart 
cannot compete with his reason, so each of you resembles a sense, a member, of the 
collective  personality of  the  body  we  constitute. Your  essential duty  springing  from 
the conscience  is  not to compete with one another, but to take pride and pleasure in 
each other’s good qualities.  

One  other  thing  remains  and  it  is  the  most  dangerous:  for  yourselves  and  your 
friends to be jealous this poor brother of yours. There are scholars of standing among 
you, and some scholars are egotistical when it comes to their learning. In that respect 
they  egotistical  even  if  they  themselves  are  modest.  They  cannot  easily  give  it  up. 
Whatever  their  hearts  and  minds  may  do,  their  evil-commanding  souls  seek  pre-
eminence  and  to  sell  themselves,  and  even  to  dispute  the  treatises  that  have  been 
written. Although their hearts  love the treatises and their minds appreciate them and 
recognize their worth, out of jealousy arising from the egotism of learning, their souls 
want  to  decry  the  value  of  the  Words,  as  though  nurturing  implicit  enmity  towards 
them, for then the products of their own thought can compete with them and be sold 
like them. But I have to tell them this: 

Even if the members of this circle of Qur’anic teaching are leading scholars and 
authorities  on  the  Law,  their  duties  in  respect  of  the  sciences  of  belief  are  only  to 
make  explanations  and  elucidations  of  the  Words  that  have  been  written,  or  to  set 
them in order. For I have understood through many signs that we have been charged 
with the duty of issuing fatwas concerning these sciences of belief. If someone within 
our circle writes anything more than this due to a feeling in his soul arising from the 
egotism of learning, it will be like a cold dispute or a deficient plagiarism. For it has  

 

490

been established through numerous evidences and signs that the parts of the Risale-i 
Nur  have  issued  from  the  Qur’an.  In  accordance  with  the  rule  of  the  division  of 
labour,  each  of  us  has  undertaken  a  duty,  and  we  convey  those  distillations  of  the 
water of life to those who are in need of them! 

SIXTH SATANIC STRATAGEM  

It  is  this:  they  take  advantage  of  the  human  traits  of  laziness,  the  desire  for 
physical  comfort,  and  attachment  to  other  duties.  Yes,  satans  among  jinn  and  men 
attack from every angle. When they see those of  our friends whose  hearts  are stout, 
intentions pure, loyalty strong, and enterprise, elevated, they attack from other sides. 
As follows: 

In  order  to  put  a stop  to  our  work  and  discourage  from  our  service,  they  profit 
from  those  friends’  laziness,  desire  for  physical  comfort,  and  attachment  to  other 
duties. They  keep people from the service of the Qur’an with every  kind of trick so 
that without their being aware of it, more work is found for some of them. Then they 
cannot find the time to serve the Qur’an. And to others, they show the enticing things 
of this world so that arousing their desires, they become slack in their service; and so 
on. These ways of attack are numerous, so cutting them short, we refer them to your 
perspicacious understanding. 

My  brothers,  take  great  care!  Your  duty  is  sacred  and  your  service,  elevated. 
Every hour of your time may be as valuable as a day’s worship. Be aware of this and 
don’t waste any of them! 

O  you  who  believe!  Persevere  in  patience  and  constancy;  vie  in  such 
fear  God,  that  you  may 
perseverance,  strengthen  each  other;  and 
prosper.(3:200) * And sell not My signs for a miserable price.(5:44) * Glory 
to  your  Sustainer,  the  Lord  of  Honour  and  Power!  [He  is  free]  from  what 
they ascribe [to Him]! * And peace be on the prophets! * And praise be to 
God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds.(37:180-2) 
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise!(2:32) 
O  God! Grant blessings  and peace  to  our  master Muhammad,  the Beloved 
Unlettered Prophet, of Mighty Stature and Exalted Rank, and to his Family 
and Companions. Amen. 

 

491

A Sacred Date 

The  date  a  significant  mystery of  the  All-Wise  Qur’an  became  clear  was  again 

contained in the word “Qur’an.” It was like this: 

According to the abjad system the numerical value of the word “Qur’an” is three 
hundred  and  fifty-one.  It  contains  two  alifs;  if  the  concealed  alif  is  read  alfun,  it  is 
alfun  with  the  value  of  a  thousand.1  That  is  to  say,  the  year  one  thousand  three 
hundred and fifty-one may be called the Year of the Qur’an, for during it the strange 
mystery of the ‘coincidences’ in the  word “Qur’an” became apparent in the parts of 
the Risale-i Nur, which  is the Qur’an’s commentary. The miraculous mystery of the 
coincidences  of  the  word  “Allah”  in  the  Qur’an  appeared  the  same  year.  A  Qur’an 
showing the  miraculous patterns, arranged in a new way, was written the same year. 
That year students of the Qur’an endeavoured to preserve the Qur’anic script with all 
their  strength  in  the  face  of  its  being  changed.  Important  aspects  of  the  Qur’an’s 
miraculousness became apparent that same year. And the same year numerous events 
occurred which were related to the Qur’an, and it seems they will continue to occur. 

                                                 
1 According to the rules of grammar, failun is read fa’lun, like katifun is read katfun. Therefore, alifun 
is read alfun. Then it becomes one thousand three hundred and fifty-one 

 

492

Addendum to the Sixth Section, 
which is the Sixth Treatise 

Six Questions 

 [This addendum  was  written in order to avoid the  disgust and insults 
that will levelled at us in the future. That is to say, it was written so that 
when it is said:  “Look  at the spineless people  of that  age!”, their spit 
should not hit us in the face, or else to wipe it off. Let the ears ring of 
the leaders  of Europe, savage beneath their  humanitarian  masks!  And 
let this be thrust in the  unseeing  eyes of those  unjust oppressors  who 
inflicted these unscrupulous tyrants on us! It is a petition with which to 
hit  over  the  head  the  followers  of  modern  low  civilization,  who  this 
century have a hundred thousand times over necessitated the existence 
of Hell.] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
No reason have we why we should not put our trust on God. Indeed He has 
guided us to the way we  [follow]. We shall certainly bear with patience all 
the  hurt  you  may  cause  us.  For  those  who  put  their  trust  should  put  their 
trust on God.(14:12) 

Recently  the  concealed  aggression  of  the  irreligious  has  taken  on  a  most  ugly 
form;  tyrannical  aggression  against  the  unfortunate  people  of  belief  and  against 
religion. Our private and unofficial call to prayer and iqama1 was interrupted during 
the  private  worship  of  myself  and  one  or  two  brothers  in  the  mosque  I  myself 
repaired.  “Why  are  you  reciting  the  iqama  in  Arabic  and  making  the  call  to  prayer 
secretly?”  they  asked.  My  patience  is  exhausted  by  keeping  silent,  so  I  say,  not  to 
those  unscrupulous  vile  men  who  are  not  worth  addressing,  but  to  the  heads  of  the 
Pharaoh-like society who with arbitrary despotism play with the fate of this nation: O 
you peo 

                                                 
1 Iqama (Ar.) (T. kâmet): formulas recited by the muezzin, signalling the commencement of the Salat 
(T. namâz) or prescribed prayers. 

 

493

ple  of  innovation  who  have  deviated  from  the  straight  path  of  religion,  I  want  the 
answer to six questions. 

T h e  F i r s t  

Every government in the world, every people which rules, and even cannibals or 
the chief of a band of brigands, have some principle, some law, by which they rule. 
So according to which principle do you carry out this extraordinary aggression? Show 
your  law!  Or  do  you  accept  as  the  law  the  arbitrary  whims  of  a  handful  of 
contemptible  officials?  Because  no  law  can  interrupt  private  worship  in  that  way; 
there cannot be such a law! 

T h e  S e c o n d 

On  what  force  do  you  rely  that  you  are  so  bold  as  to  violate  the  principle  of 
freedom of  conscience,  which  governs  almost  everywhere  in  mankind,  especially  in 
this age of freedom and in civilized circles, and to treat it lightly and so indirectly to 
insult mankind and dismiss their objections? What power do you have that you attack 
religion and the people of religion in this way as though you had taken irreligion as a 
religion for yourselves in bigoted fashion, although by calling yourselves secular you 
proclaim that you will interfere with neither religion nor irreligion? Such a thing will 
not  remain  secret!  You  will  have  to  answer  for  it!  So  what  answer  will  you  give? 
Although  you  could  not  hold  out  against  the  objections  of  the  smallest  of  twenty 
governments,  you  try  to  violate  by  force  freedom  of  conscience,  as  though  you 
completely disregard the objections of twenty governments. 

T h e  T h i r d  

According  to  what  principle  do  you propose  to  people  like  me  who  follow  the 
Shafi‘i  school  of  law,  the  Hanafi  school,  in  a  way  opposed  to  the  elevatedness  and 
purity of that school, due to the false fatwas of certain corrupt religious scholars who 
have sold their consciences to gain the world? If, after abrogating the Shafi‘i school, 
which has millions of followers, and making them all follow the Hanafi school, it is 
forcibly  proposed  to  me  in  tyrannical  fashion,  it  may  perhaps  be  said  that  it  is  a 
principle of irreligious people like  you. Otherwise it  is arbitrary and despicable, and 
we do not follow the whims of people such as that, and we do not recognize them! 

T h e  F o u r t h 

In accordance with which principle do you propose through a corrupt, innovating 
fatwa,  to  “perform  the  iqama  in  Turkish”  in  a  way  completely  contrary  to  Turkish 
nationalism, which is sincerely religious and sincerely  

 

494

respectful towards religion and has  since early times blended and united with Islam, 
in the name of Turkism, which has the meaning of Europeanism, to those like me who 
belong to another nation? Yes, although  I  have friendly and brotherly relations with 
true Turks, I have in no respect any relation with the Turkism of imitators of Europe 
like  you. How can you propose such a thing to me? Through which law? Perhaps, if 
you  abolish  the  nationhood  of  the  Kurds,  of  whom  there  are  millions  and  who  for 
thousands of years have not forgotten their nationhood and language, and are the true 
fellow-citizens  and  companions  in  jihad  of  the  Turks,  and  make  them  forget  their 
language,  then  perhaps  your  proposal  to  those  like  me  who  are  reckoned  to be  of  a 
different race would be in accordance with some sort of savage principle. Otherwise it 
is purely arbitrary. The arbitrary  whims of individuals may  not be followed, and we 
do not follow them! 

T h e  F i f t h 

A  government  may  apply  all  laws  to  its  citizens  and  to  those  it  accepts  as  its 
citizens, but it cannot apply its  laws to those it does not accept. For they are able to 
say: “Since we are not citizens, you are not our government!” 

Furthermore, no government can  inflict two penalties at the same time. It either 
imprisons a murderer, or it executes him. To punish by both imprisonment and capital 
punishment is a principle nowhere! 

However, despite the fact that I have caused no harm whatsoever to this country 
and  nation,  for  eight  years  you  have  held  me  in  captivity  in  a  way  not  inflicted  on 
even a criminal belonging to the wildest and most foreign nation. Although you have 
pardoned criminals, you have negated my freedom and deprived me of all civil rights. 
You have not said: “He too is a son of this land,” so in accordance with what principle 
and  law  do  you  propose,  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  your  nation,  these  freedom-
destroying principles to someone like me who is a foreigner to you in every respect? 
Since in the Great War you have counted as nothing all the heroic deeds to which this 
person  was  the  means  and  were  testified  to  by  the  Army’s  commanders,  and 
considered his self-sacrficing struggles for the sake of this country to be crimes; and 
since you deemed his preserving the good morality of this unfortunate nation and his 
serious  and  effective  work  to  secure  its  happiness  in  this  world  and  the  next  to  be 
treason;  and  since  you  have  punished  for  eight  years  (and  now  the  punishment  has 
been for twenty-eight years) someone who does not for himself accept your injurious, 
dangerous,  arbitrary  principles,  which  in  reality  are  without benefit  and  spring  from 
unbelief and from Europe; the punishment is the same. I did not accept its appli 

 

495

cation  so  you  made  me  suffer  it.  So  according  to  what  principle  is  it  to  enforce  a 
second punishment? 

T h e  S i x t h 

In  view  of  the treatment  you  have  meted  out  to  me,  according to  your  belief,  I 
oppose you in general fashion. You are sacrifing your religion and life in the hereafter 
for  the  sake  of  your  lives  in  this  world.  According  to  you,  due  to  the  opposition 
between us and contrary to you, we are all the time ready to sacrifice our life in this 
world  for  our  religion  and  for  the  hereafter.  To  sacrifice  two  or  three  years  of 
humiliating life under your domination in order to gain sacred martyrdom, is like the 
water  of  Kawthar  for  us.  However,  in  order  to  make  you  tremble,  relying  on  the 
effulgence and indications of the All-Wise Qur’an, I tell you this with certainty: 

You  shall  not  live  after  killing  me!  You  shall  be  driven  out  of  the  world,  your 
paradise  and  your  beloved,  by  an  irresistible  hand,  and  swiftly  cast  into  everlasting 
darkness. Behind me, your Nimrod-like chiefs will be quickly killed and sent to me. 
In the divine presence I shall grasp hold of them by their collars, and on divine justice 
casting them down to the lowest of the low, I shall take my revenge! 

O you miserable wretches who sell religion and your lives in the hereafter for this 
world! If you want to live, do not interfere with me! I hope from divine mercy that my 
death  will  serve  religion  more  than  my  life  and will  explode over  your  heads  like  a 
bomb, scattering you! Cause me trouble if you have the courage! If you do anything, 
you shall see! With all my strength I proclaim this verse in the face of all your threats: 

Men said to them: “A great army is gathering against you;” and frightened 
them; but it only increased their faith. they said: “For us God suffices, and 
He is the Best Disposer of Affairs.”(3:173) 

 

496

Seventh Section 

The Seven Signs 

 [These  seven  signs  are  the  answers  to  three  questions.  The  first 
question consists of four signs.] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
So believe in God and His Apostle, the unlettered Prophet, who believes in 
God and His Words; follow him that [so] you may be guided.(7:158) * Fain 
would they extinguish God’s Light with their mouths, but God will not allow 
but  that  His  Light  should  be  perfected,  even  though  the  unbelievers  may 
detest [it].(9:32) 

FIRST SIGN 

Like  all  the  bad  things  they  do,  the  arguments  which  those  people  who  are 
attempting to change the marks of Islam cite to support themselves spring from their 
blind imitation of Europe. They say: 

“In London, Europeans who have embraced Islam translate many things like the 
call to prayer and iqama into their own languages in their own country. The World of 
Islam  says  nothing  in  the  face  of  this  and  does  not  object.  That  must  mean  it  is 
permissible according to the Shari‘a, since they are silent?” 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  There  is  such  a  glaring  difference  here  that  no  conscious 
being  could  make such  a comparison  and  imitate them.  For  the  European  lands  are 
called  the  Abode of  War  in  the  terminology  of  the Shari‘a,  and there  are  numerous 
things that are permissible  in the  Abode of War that  are  not lawful  in the  Abode of 
Islam. 

Furthermore, the lands of Europe are the realm of Christendom. They are not an 
environment that communicates and  instils the meanings of the terms of the Shari‘a 
and  concepts  of  the  sacred  words,  so  necessarily  the  sacred  meanings  have  been 
preferred to the sacred words; the words have been abandoned for the meaning; the 
lesser  of  two  evils  has  been  chosen.  In  the  Abode  of  Islam,  however,  the  very 
environment  teaches  the  people  of  Islam  the  abbreviated  meanings  of  those  sacred 
words. The conversa 

 

497

tions of Muslims about Islamic traditions and Islamic history and the marks of Islam 
and the pillars of Islam, all continuously instil in them the concise meanings of those 
blessed  words.  In  this  country,  besides  the  mosques  and  the  medreses,  even  the 
gravestones  in  the  graveyards  inculcate  those  sacred  meanings  in  believers  like 
teachers and recall them to them. If for some worldly advantage, someone who calls 
himself a Muslim learns fifty words a day from a French dictionary, and then in fifty 
years  does not  learn  the  sacred  phrases  “Glory  be  to  God,”  “All  praise be to  God,” 
“There is no god but God,” and “God is Most Great,” which are repeated fifty times 
daily, does he not fall lower than an animal? These sacred words cannot be translated 
and  corrupted  and  deported  for  such  beasts!  To  change  and  deport  them  means 
erasing  all  the  gravestones;  it  means  turning  all  the  dead  in  the  graveyards  against 
them, trembling at such an insult. 

In  order  to deceive  the  nation,  corrupt  religious  scholars  who  have  been  misled 
by the irreligious, say that contrary to the other Imams, Imam-i A‘zam1 said: “If the 
need arises in distant countries, it is permissible for those who know no Arabic at all 
to recite the Fatiha in Persian.”2 We are in need of this, so can we recite it in Turkish? 
T h e  A n s w e r : The most important of the leading authorities as well as the 
other  twelve  leading  mujtahids  have  given  fatwas  opposing  this  fatwa  of  Imam-i 
A‘zam.  The  great  highway  of  the  World  of  Islam  is  their  highway;  the  Muslim 
community may  follow it. Those who drive the community towards another, special 
and  narrow,  way  are  leading  it  astray.  Imam-i  A‘zam’s  fatwa  is  particular  in  five 
respects: 

Firstly: It addresses people who are far from the centre of Islam. 
Secondly: It is in consequence of real need. 
Thirdly:  According  to  one  narration,  it  refers  only  to  translations  into  Persian, 

which is supposed to be a language of the people of Paradise. 

Fourthly:  The  ruling  is  limited  to  the  Fatiha,  so that  those  who  do  not  know it 

will not give up performing the obligatory prayers. 

Fifthly:  Permission  was  given  so  that  the  sacred  meanings  could be understood 
by  the  ordinary  people  whose  Islamic  zeal  arose  from  their  powerful  belief.  But  to 
translate  them  and  discard  the  Arabic  original  due  to  weakness  of  belief,  negative 
nationalism,  and  hatred  for  the  Arabic  language,  driven  by  a  destructive  urge,  will 
cause people to renounce religion.  

                                                 
1 Imam-i A’zam: Abu Hanifa Nu’man b. Thabit (80/699-150/767), the founder of the Hanifi school of 
law. The founders (Imams) of the other three main Sunni schools of law were Abu ‘Abdullah Malik b. 
Anas (94/716-179/795; Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Hanbal (164/780-241/855); and Muhammad b. Idris 
al-Shafi’i (150/767-205/820). 
2 Sarakhsi, al-Mabsut, i, 37, 234; Kashani, Bada’i al-Sana’i, i, 112. 

 

498

SECOND SIGN 

The people of innovation who have changed the marks of Islam first of all sought 
fatwas from corrupt religious scholars. They had previously pointed out that the fatwa 
we  explained  was  particular  in  five  respects.  Secondly,  the  people  of  innovation 
adopted  the  following  inauspicious  idea  from  the  European  reformists:  being 
dissatisfied  with  the  Catholic  Church  foremost  the  revolutionaries,  reformists,  and 
philosophers, who were innovators according to the Church, favoured Protestantism, 
which was considered to Mu‘tazilite, and taking advantage of the French Revolution 
they partially destroyed the Catholic Church and proclaimed Protestantism. 

Then the pseudo-patriots here, who are accustomed to imitating blindly, said: “A 
revolution  like  that  came  about  in  the  Christian  religion. At  first  the  revolutionaries 
were  called  apostates,  then  later  they  were  again  accepted  as  Christians.  So  why 
shouldn’t there be a similar religious revolution in Islam?” 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  The  difference  here  is  even  greater  than  in  the  false 
comparison in the First Sign. Because in the religion of Jesus (Upon whom be peace), 
only  the  fundamentals  of  religion  were  taken  from  him.  Most  of  the  injunctions 
relating  to  social  life  and  the  secondary  matters  of  the  law  were  formulated  by  the 
disciples  and  other  spiritual  leaders.  The  greater  part  were  taken  from  former  holy 
scriptures. Since Jesus (Upon whom be peace) was not a worldly ruler and sovereign, 
and  since  he  was  not  the  source  of  general  social  laws,  the  fundamentals  of  his 
religion  were  as  though  clothed  with  the  garment  of  common  laws  and  civil  rules 
taken from outside, having been given a different form and called the Christian law. If 
this form is changed and the garment transformed, the fundamental religion of Jesus 
(Upon whom be peace) may persist. It does not infer denying or giving the lie to Jesus 
himself (Upon whom be peace).  

However, the Glory of the World (Upon whom be blessings and peace) was the 
founder of the religion and Shari‘a of Islam. He was the sovereign of this world and 
the  next,  and  the  East  and  West  and  Andalusia  and  India  were  his  seat  of  rule.  He 
himself therefore both taught the  fundamentals of the religion of  Islam, and brought 
its secondary matters and other injunctions, including even minor matters of conduct; 
he himself taught them; he commanded them. That is to say, the secondary matters of 
Islam  are  not  like  a  garment  capable  of  change,  so  that  if  they  are  changed,  the 
essential  religion  will  persist.  They  are  rather  a  sort  body  for  the  fundamentals  of 
religion,  or  at  least  a  skin.  They  have  blended  and  combined  with  it  and  cannot  be 
separated.  To  change  them  infers  direct  denial  and  contradiction  of  the  one  who 
brought the Shari‘a. 

 

499

As  for  the  differences  in  the  schools  of  law,  this  has  arisen from differences  in 
ways  of  understanding  the  theoretical  principles  shown  by  the  Shari‘a’s  owner. 
Principles called “the essentials of religion,” which are not open to interpretation, and 
those  called  “incontrovertible”  cannot  be  changed  in  any  way  and  may  not  be 
interpreted.  Anyone  who  does  change  them  quits  the  religion  and  is  included under 
the rule: “They renounce religion as the arrow flies from the bow.”3 

The people of innovation have found the following pretext for their irreligion and 
deviation from the straight path. They say: “The French Revolution was the cause of a 
sequence of events in the world of humanity; the clergy and spiritual leaders and the 
Catholic  Church,  which  was  their  Church,  were  attacked  and  eliminated.  Later  the 
Revolution was condoned by a lot of people; also, the French made greater progress. 
Is this not so?” 

T h e  A n s w e r : Like with the previous comparisons, the differences here are 
clear.  For  in  France,  the  Christian  religion  and  particularly  the  Catholic  Church  had 
for a long time been a means of domination and despotism in the hands of the upper 
and  ruling  classes.  It  was  the  means  by  which  they  perpetuated  their  hold  over  the 
ordinary people. And since it was through the Catholic Church that the patriots were 
oppressed,  who  among  the  common  people  were  awakened  and  were  called 
“Jacobins,”  and  the  freedom-seeking  thinkers  were  persecuted,  who  attacked  the 
despotism  of  the  upper  class  tyrants;  and  since  for  nearly  four  hundred  years  the 
Catholic  Church  had  been  an  imputed  cause,  through  revolutions  in  Europe,  of 
overturning  the  stability  of  social  life,  it  had  been  attacked,  not  in  the  name  of 
irreligion, but by the other Christian sects. A feeling of indignation and enmity arose 
among  the  common  people  and  the  philosophers  as  a  result  of  which  the  above-
mentioned historical event took place.  

However, no oppressed person and no thinker has the right to complain about the 
religion of Muhammad (UWBP) and the Shari‘a of Islam. For it does not injure them, 
it  protects  them.  Islamic  history  is  there  for  all  to  see.  Apart  from  one  or  two 
incidents,  no  internal  wars  of  religion  have  occurred.  Whereas  the  Catholic  Church 
caused four hundred years of internal revolutions. 

Furthermore, Islam has been the stronghold of the common people rather than of 
the upper classes. Through enjoining the payment of zakat and prohibiting usury and 
interest,  it  has  made  the  upper  classes  not  despots  over  the  common  people  but 
servants in a way! It says: “The master  

                                                 
3 Bukhari, Anbiya’, 6; Manaqib, 25; Maghazi, 61; Fada’il al-Qur’an, 36. 

 

500

of  a  people  is  its  servant.”4  And,  “The  best  of  people  is  the  one  most  useful  to 
people.”5 Also, through sacred phrases like, 

So will they not think?(6:50)  * So will they not reflect on it?(4:82)  * So will 
they not reason?(2:44),  

the All-Wise Qur’an calls on the intellect to testify;  it warns, refers to the reason, it 
urges  investigation.  Through  this,  it  accords  scholars  and  the  people  of  reason  a 
position;  it  gives  them  importance.  It  does  not  dismiss  the  reason  like  the  Catholic 
Church; it does not silence thinkers, or require blind imitation of them. 

Since  the  fundamentals  of,  not  true  Christianity,  but  the  present-day  Christian 
religion and the fundamentals of Islam have parted on another  important point, they 
go  their  separate  ways  in  many  respects  like  the  above-mentioned  differences.  The 
important point is this: 

Islam is the religion of the true affirmation of divine unity (tevhid-i hakikî) so that 
it  dismisses  intermediaries  and  causes.  It  breaks  egotism  and  establishes  sincere 
worship. It cuts at the root every  sort of false dominicality,  starting  from that of the 
soul,  and  rebuffs  it.  It  is  because  of  this  that  if  a  person  of  high  position  from  the 
upper class is going to be completely religious, he will have to give up his egotism. If 
he does not give up egotism, he will lose his strength of religion and to an extent give 
up his religion.  

As for the Christian religion of the present day, since it has accepted the belief of 
Jesus  (Upon  whom  be  peace)  being  the  Son  of  God,  it  ascribes  an  actual  effect  to 
causes  and  intermediaries.  It  cannot  break  egotism  in  the  name  of  religion.  Rather, 
saying that egotism is a holy deputy of Jesus (Upon whom be peace), it ascribes it a 
sacredness. For this reason, members of the  Christian upper classes who occupy the 
highest worldly positions may be completely religious. In fact, there are many like the 
former  American  President,  Wilson,  and  the  former  British  Prime  Minister,  Lloyd 
George, who were as religious as bigoted priests. But any Muslims who rise to those 
positions rarely remain completely religious and firm in their religion, for they cannot 
give up their pride and egotism. And true taqwa cannot be combined with pride and 
egotism. 

Yes,  just  as  the  religious  bigotry  of  the  Christian  upper  class  and  slackness  in 
religion  of  the  Muslim  upper  class  demonstrate  an  important  difference,  so  the  fact 
that the philosophers who emerged from Christianity were  

                                                 
4 al-Maghribi, Jami’ al-Shaml, i, 450, no: 1668; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 463. 
5 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 463; al-Manawi, Fayd al-Qadir, iii, 481, no: 4044. 

 

501

indifferent towards religion or else opposed it, while the great majority of those who 
emerged  from  Islam  constructed 
their  philosophy  on  Islamic  fundamentals, 
demonstrates yet another important difference. 

Furthermore, generally, ordinary Christians who have fallen on hard times or are 
sent to prison cannot expect assistance from religion. Formerly, most of them became 
irreligious.  In  fact,  the  revolutionaries  famous  in  history  who  instigated  the  French 
Revolution  and  were  called  “irreligious  Jacobins,”  were  mostly  disaster-stricken 
common people. Whereas in Islam, the great majority of those who suffer disaster or 
imprisonment await  succour from religion  and they become religious. This situation 
too, demonstrates an important difference. 

THIRD SIGN 

The people of innovation say: “Religious bigotry made us backward. Living this 
age  necessitates  giving up bigotry. Europe advanced when  it abandoned it. Isn’t this 
so?” 

T h e  A n s w e r :  You are wrong and you have been deceived! Or else you are 
deceiving,  for  Europe  is  bigoted  in  religion.  Tell  an  ordinary  Bulgar  or  an  English 
soldier or a French Jacobin: “Wear this turban, or else you’ll be thrown into prison!”, 
and their bigotry will force them to reply: “Not  prison, if  you kill me even, I won’t 
insult my religion and nation in that way!” 

Also,  history  testifies  that  whenever  the  people  of  Islam  have  adhered  to  their 
religion,  they  have  advanced  in  relation  to  the  strength  of  their  adherence.  And 
whenever they  have become less firm in their religion, they  have declined. Whereas 
with Christianity, it is the opposite. This too arises from an essential difference. 

Also, Islam cannot be compared with other religions; if a Muslim abandons Islam 
and  gives  up  his  religion,  he  will  not  accept  any  other  prophet;  indeed,  he  will  not 
acknowledge  Almighty  God  either  nor  probably  recognize  anything  sacred.  He  will 
have  no  conscience  that  will  allow  him  moral  and  spiritual  attainment;  it  will  be 
corrupted. Therefore, in the view of Islam, in wartime, an unbeliever has the right to 
life.  His  life  is  protected  according  to  Islam  if  he  is  outside  the  country  and  makes 
peace, or if  he  is  inside the country  and pays the  head-tax. But an apostate does not 
have the right to life. For his conscience  is corrupted and he becomes like poison in 
the  life  of  society.  But  a  Christian  may  still  contribute  to  society,  even  if  he  is 
irreligious.  He  may  accept  some  sacred  matters  and  may  believe  in  some  of  the 
prophets, and may assent to Almighty God in some respects. 

I wonder, what advantage do these innovators, or more accurately  

 

502

deviants  or  heretics,  find  in  this  irreligion?  If  they  are  thinking  of  government  and 
public order, to govern ten irreligious anarchists who do not know God and to repulse 
their evils  is much more difficult than  governing a thousand people with religion. If 
they are thinking of progress, such irreligious people are an obstacle to progress, just 
as they are harmful for the administration and government. They destroy security and 
public  order,  which  are  the  basis  of  progress  and  commerce.  In  truth,  they  are 
destructive due to the very way they have taken. The biggest fool in the world is one 
who expects progress, prosperity, and happiness from irreligious anarchists like them. 
One of those fools who occupied a high position, said: “We said ‘Allah! Allah!’ and 
remained backward. Europe said ‘Guns and cannons,’ and advanced.” 

According to the rule, “A fool should be answered with silence,” the answer for 
such people is silence. But because behind certain fools there are inauspicious clever 
people, we say this: 

O you wretches! This world is a guesthouse. Every day thirty thousand witnesses 
put their signature with their corpses to the decree “Death is a reality” and they testify 
to it. Can you kill death? Can you contradict those witnesses? Since you can’t, death 
makes people say: “Allah! Allah!”  Which of  your guns and cannons can illuminate 
the  everlasting  darkness  confronting  someone  in  the  throes  of  death  in  place  of 
“Allah! Allah!”, and transform his absolute despair into absolute hope? Since there is 
death and we shall enter the grave, and this life departs and an eternal life comes, if 
guns and cannons are said once, “Allah! Allah!” should be said a thousand times. And 
if  it  is  in  Allah’s  way,  the  gun  also  says  “Allah!”,  and  the  cannon  booms  “Allahu 
Akbar!” It breaks the fast with “Allah,” and starts it. 

FOURTH SIGN  

The destructive innovators are of two kinds: 
The First Kind say as though on account of religion and out of loyality to Islam, 
as  though  to  strengthen  religion  with  nationalism:  “We  want  to  plant  the  luminous 
tree  of  religion,  which  has  grown  weak,  in  the  earth  of  nationalism,  in  order  to 
strengthen it.” They appear to be supporting religion. 

The Second Sort say in the name of the nation and on account of nationalism, in 
order  to  strengthen  racialism,  say:  “We  want  to  graft  Islam  onto  the  nation,”  thus 
creating innovations. 

To the First Sort, we say:  O unhappy, corrupt scholars of religion who confirm 
the  saying  “loyal  fools,”  or  ecstatic,  unthinking,  ignorant  Sufis!  The  Tuba-tree  of 
Islam,  whose  roots  are  founded  in  the  reality  of  the  universe  and  whose  branches 
spread through the truths of the universe, cannot  

 

503

be planted in the earth of imaginary, temporary,  partial, particular, negative, indeed, 
baseless,  rancorous,  tyrannical,  and  dark  racialism!  To  try  to  do  so  is  to  attempt 
something foolish, destructive, and innovative. 

To the Second Sort of nationalists, we say this:  O you drunken pseudo-patriots! 
Perhaps the previous century could have been the age of nationalism. This century is 
not  the  age  of  racialism!  Communism  and  socialism  pervade  everything, destroying 
the  idea  of  racialism.  The  age  of  racialism  is  passing.  Eternal,  permanent  Islamic 
nationalism cannot  be  bound  onto  temporary  unstable  racialism  and  grafted  onto  it. 
And even if it were to be, it would corrupt the Islamic nation, but it would not reform 
racialist nationalism. Yes, there appears to be a pleasure and temporary strength in a 
temporary graft, but it is very temporary and the consequences are dangerous. 

Furthermore,  it  would  open  up  a  split  in  the  Turkish  people  that  could  not  be 
healed in  all  eternity. Then the  nation’s  strength  would be reduced to nothing, since 
one section would have broken the power of the other. If two mountains are placed in 
the two pans of some scales, a few pounds weight can move the two, raising one, and 
lowering the other. 

T h e  S e c o n d  Q u e s t i o n consists of two signs:   

The  First  is  the  FIFTH  SIGN,  and  is  a  very  brief  answer  to  an  important 

question: 

Q u e s t i o n : There are numerous authentic narrations about the appearance of 
the Mahdi at the end of time and his putting the world to rights, which will have been 
corrupted.  However,  the  present  time  is  the  time  of  the  group or  social  collectivity, 
not  of  the  individual.  However  great  a  genius  an  individual  person  is,  even  a 
hundredfold  genius,  if  he  is  not  the  representative  of  a  group  and  if  he  does  not 
represent  a  group’s  collective  personality,  he  will  be  defeated  in  the  face  of  the 
collective personality of an opposing group. At this time, however exalted the power 
of his sainthood, how can  he reform the world amid the widespread corruption of a 
human  group  such  as  that?  If  all  the  Mahdi’s  works  are  wondrous,  it  would  be 
contrary  to  the  divine  wisdom  and  laws  in  the  world.  We  want  to  understand  the 
reality of this matter of the Mahdi. How can we? 

T h e  A n s w e r : Out of His perfect mercy, every time the Muslim community 
has  been  corrupted,  Almighty  God  has  sent  a  reformer,  or  a  regenerator,  or  a 
vicegerent of high standing, or a supreme spiritual pole, or a perfect guide, or blessed 
persons  resembling  a Mahdi,  as  a  mark of  His  protecting  the Shari‘a  of  Islam  until 
eternity;  they  have  removed  the  corruption,  reformed  the  nation,  and  preserved 
Muhammad’s (UWBP) religion.  

 

504

Since His custom has always been thus, certainly at the time of greatest corruption at 
the end of time He will send a luminous person as both the greatest interpreter of the 
Law, and the supreme renewer, and ruler, and Mahdi, and  guide, and spiritual pole, 
and that person will be from the Prophet’s (UWBP) Family. Almighty God fills and 
empties the world between the heavens and earth with clouds, and in an instant stills 
the storms of the sea, and in an hour in spring creates samples of the summer and in 
an  hour  in  summer  creates  a  winter  storm.  Such  an  All-Powerful  One  of  Glory  can 
also scatter the darkness covering the World of Islam by means of the Mahdi. He has 
promised this and certainly He will carry out His promise.  

If  considered  from  the  point  of  view  of  divine  power,  it  is  most  easy.  And  if 
thought  of  from  the  point  of  view  of  causes  and  divine  wisdom,  it  is  again  so 
reasonable  and  necessary  that  thinkers  have  asserted  that  even  if  it  had  not  been 
narrated from the Bringer of Sure News (UWBP), it still should be thus. And it will 
be.  It  is  like  this:  All  praise  be  to  God,  the  prayer,  “O  God,  grant  blessings  to  our 
master  Muhammad  and  to  the  Family  of  our  master  Muhammad,  as  you  granted 
blessings to Abraham and to the Family of Abraham, in all the world; indeed You are 
worthy of all praise, exalted!,” which is repeated by the Muslim community five times 
every day in all the obligatory prayers, has self-evidently been accepted. For like the 
Family  of  Abraham  (Upon  whom  be  peace),  the  members  of  Muhammad’s  (Upon 
whom be blessings and peace) Family stand as commanders at the heads of all blessed 
chains of spiritual authorities in the assemblies of all the regions of the world in all 
centuries.6 They are so numerous that together they form a mighty army. If they took 
on  physical  form  and  with  their  solidarity  were  formed  into  a  division,  if  they 
awakened the religion of Islam and bound it together in unity and established a sort of 
sacred  nationhood,  the  army  of  no  other  nation  could  withstand  them.  Thus,  that 
numerous, powerful army is the Family of the Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings 
and peace), the Mahdi’s most select army. 

Yes, today in the world there is no family distinguished by such high honour and 
elevated qualities  and  nobility  in  its  descendants,  in  unbroken  succession  and  well-
documented genealogy, which is as powerful and  

                                                 
6 Just one of them is Sayyid Ahmad al-Sanusi, who commands millions of followers. Another is Sayyid 
Idrês, who commands more than one hundred thousand. Another Sayyid, Sayyid Yahya, commands 
hundreds of thousands of men. And so on. Just as among the members of this tribe of Sayyids there are 
numerous outward commanders, so too there are the champions of spiritual heroes, like Sayyid ‘Abd 
al-Qadir Gilani, Sayyid Abu’l-Hasan al-Shazali, and Sayyid Ahmad Badawi. 

 

505

important  as  the  line  of  Sayyids  of  the Family  of  the  Prophet  (UWBP).  Since  early 
times it is they who have been at the heads of all the groups of the people of truth, and 
they  who  have  been  the  renowned  leaders  of  the  people  of  perfection.  Now  it  is  a 
blessed line  numbering millions. Vigilant  and circumspect, their  hearts full of belief 
and love of the Prophet (UWBP), they are distinguished by the honour of their world-
renowned lineage. Momentous events shall occur which will awaken and arouse that 
sacred  force  within  the  vast  community.  Certainly,  the  elevated  ardour  in  that  huge 
force will surge up and the Mahdi shall come to lead it, guiding it to the way of truth 
and reality. We await from the divine law and divine mercy that it should be such, and 
its  being  such,  like  we await  the  coming  of  spring  after  winter;  and  we  are  right  to 
await it. 

The Second Sign, that is, the SIXTH SIGN 

The  Mahdi’s  luminous  community  will  repair  the  destruction  of  the  innovative 
regime  of  the  secret  society  of  the  Sufyan,  and  will  restore  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP) 
glorious Sunna. That is to say, the secret society of the Sufyan will try to destroy the 
Shari‘a of Muhammad (UWBP) in the World of Islam with the intention of denying 
his messengership, and will be killed and routed by the miraculous immaterial sword 
of the Mahdi’s community. 

Moreover, in the world of humanity, the secret society of the Dajjal will overturn 
civilization  and  subvert  all  mankind’s  sacred  matters,  with  the  intention  of  denying 
the Godhead. A zealous, self-sacrificing community known as a Christian community 
but worthy of being called “Muslim Christians,” will work to unite the true religion of 
Jesus  (Upon  whom  be  peace)  with  the  reality  of  Islam  and  will  kill  and  rout  that 
society of the Dajjal under the leadership of Jesus (UWP), thus saving humanity from 
atheism. 

This  important  mystery  is  very  lengthy.  Since  we  have  discussed  it  briefly  in 

other places, here we make do with this indication. 

SEVENTH SIGN 

That is, the Third Question. They say: “Your former refutations and strivings in 
the way of Islam were not in your present style. Also you do not defend Islam against 
Europe  in  the  manner  of  the  philosophers  and  thinkers.  Why  have  you  changed the 
style of the Old Said? Why do you not act in the same way as those who strive for the 
cause of Islam by non-physical means? 

T  h  e    A  n  s  w  e  r  :  The  Old  Said  and  certain  thinkers  in  part  accepted  the 

principles of human and European philosophy, and contested them with  

 

506

their own weapons; they accepted them to a degree. They submitted unshakeably to 
some of their principles in the form of the physical sciences, and therefore could not 
demonstrate the true worth of Islam. It was quite simply as though they were grafting 
Islam with the branches of philosophy, the roots of which they  supposed to be very 
deep; as though strengthening it. But since this method produced few victories and it 
reduced  Islam’s  worth  to  a  degree,  I  gave  it  up,  and  I  showed  in  fact  that  Islam’s 
principles  are  so  profound  that  the  deepest  principles  of  philosophy  cannot  reach 
them;  indeed,  they  remain  superficial  beside  them.  The  Thirtieth  Word,  Twenty-
Fourth Letter, and  Twenty-Ninth  Word  have demonstrated  this  truth  with  proofs.  In 
the  former way,  philosophy  was  supposed  to be  profound  and  the  matters  of  Islam, 
external;  it  was  supposed  that by  binding  it  with  the  branches  of  philosophy,  Islam 
would be preserved and made to endure. As if the principles of philosophy could in 
any way reach the matters of Islam! 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which you have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise!(2:32) 
And they shall say: “Praise be to God, Who has guided us to this [felicity]; 
never  could  we  have  found  guidance,  had  it  not  been  for  the  guidance  of 
God; indeed,  it  was  the  truth  that the prophets of  our Sustainer  brought to 
us!”(7:43) 
O God! Grant blessings to our master Muhammad and to the Family of our 
master Muhammad, as you granted blessings to our master Abraham and to 
the  Family  of  Abraham,  in  all  the  worlds;  indeed,  You  are  worthy  of  all 
praise, exalted! 

The Eight Symbols, 
Which is the Eighth Section 

This treatise consists of eight symbols, that is, eight short treatises. The basis of these 
symbols  is  coincidence  (tevafuk),  which  is  an  important  principle  of  the  science  of 
jafr, and a valuable key to the occult sciences, and to some of the Qur’an’s mysteries 
pertaining to the Unseen. It has not been included here since  it is to be published in 
another collection. 

*   *   * 

*   *   * 

 

507

The Ninth Section 

Nine Allusions 

 [This  section  is  about  the  paths  of  sainthood,  and  consists  of  nine 
allusions.] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Behold!  Verily  on  the  friends  of  God  there  is  no  fear,  nor  shall  they 
grieve.(10:62) 

First Allusion 

Underlying  the  terms  Sufism,  path,  sainthood,  and  spiritual  journeying  is  an 
agreeable, luminous, joyful, and spiritual sacred truth. This truth has been proclaimed, 
taught, and described in thousands of books written by authoritative scholars among 
the people of illumination and unveiling, who have told the Muslim community and 
us  about  it.  May  God  reward  them  abundantly!  Now,  because  of  some  compelling 
circumstances at  this  time,  we  shall  point  out  a  few  droplets,  like  sprinklings,  from 
that vast ocean. 

Question?  What is the Sufi path? 
The Answer: The aim and goal of the Sufi path is – knowledge of God and the 
unfolding  of  the truths  of  faith  –  through  a  spiritual  journeying  with the  feet  of  the 
heart  under  the  shadow  of  the  Ascension  of  Muhammad  (UWBP),  to  manifest  the 
truths of faith  and the Qur’an through tasting and certain enhanced states, and to an 
extent through direct vision; it is an elevated human mystery and perfection called the 
Sufi path or Sufism. 

Yes, since man  is a comprehensive  index of the  universe,  his  heart resembles a 
map  of  thousands  of  worlds.  For  innumerable  human  sciences  and  fields  of 
knowledge show that man’s brain in his head is a sort of centre of the universe, like a 
telephone  and  telegraph  exchange  for  innumerable  lines.  Similarly,  the  millions  of 
light-scattering books written by incalculable saints show man’s heart in his essential 
being to be the place of manifestation of  innumerable cosmic truths, and to be their 
pivot, and seed.  

Since the human heart and brain are thus central, and comprise the  

 

508

members of a mighty tree in the form of a seed, and within them are encapsulated the 
parts  and  components  of  an  eternal,  majestic  machine  pertaining  to  the  hereafter, 
certainly the heart’s Creator willed that it should be worked and brought out from the 
potential  to  the  actual,  and  developed,  and  put  into  action,  for  that  is  what  He  did. 
Since He willed it, the heart will certainly work like the mind. And the most effective 
means of working it is to be turned towards the truths of faith on the Sufi path through 
the remembrance of God in the degrees of sainthood. 

Second Allusion 

The  keys  and  means  of  this  journeying  of  the  heart  and  spiritual  progress  are 
remembrance  of  God  and  reflective  thought.  Their  virtues  are  too  numerous  to  be 
described.  Apart  from  uncountable  benefits  in  the  hereafter  and  human  attainments 
and  perfections,  a  minor  benefit  pertaining  to  this  tumultuous  worldly  life  is  as 
follows:  everyone  wants  a  solace  and  seeks  enjoyment  in  order  to  be  saved  a  little 
from  the  upheavals  of  life  and  its  heavy  burdens,  and  to  take  a  breather;  everyone 
searches out something friendly to banish the loneliness. For one or two people out of 
ten, the social gatherings in civilized life offer a temporary, but heedless and drunken 
familiarity, intimacy, and solace. But eighty per cent live solitary lives in mountains 
or  valleys,  or  are  driven  to  distant  places  in  search  of  a  livelihood,  or  due  to  such 
agencies as calamities or old age which recall the hereafter, they are deprived of the 
companionship  of  human  groups  and  societies.  Their  circumstances  allow  them  no 
familiarity, friendliness, or consolation. 

For  such  a  person,  true  solace,  intimacy,  and  sweet  pleasure  are  to be  found  in 
addressing  his  own  heart  in  those  distant  places  and  desolate  mountains  and 
distressing valleys, in working it through remembrance of God and reflection. Calling 
on God  Almighty,  he  may  become  intimate  with  Him  in  his  heart,  and by  virtue of 
that intimacy think of the things around him, which were regarding him savagely, as 
smiling  on  him  familiarly.  He  will  say:  “My  Creator,  whom  I  am  recollecting,  has 
innumerable servants  here  in  my  place  of  solitude,  just  as  He  has  everywhere. I am 
not alone; loneliness has no meaning.” Thanks to his faith, he receives pleasure from 
that  sense  of  familiarity.  He  grasps  the  meaning  of  life’s  happiness,  and  he  offers 
thanks to God. 

Third Allusion 

Sainthood  is  a  proof  of  divine  messengership;  the  Sufi  path  is  a  proof  of  the 
Shari‘a.  For  the  truths  of  belief  which  messengership  preaches,  sainthood  sees  and 
confirms with a sort of direct vision with the heart and tast 

 

509

ing with the spirit at the degree of the vision of certainty. Its confirmation is a certain 
proof  of  the  veracity  of  messengership.  Through  the  experiential  knowledge  of  the 
Sufi  path  and  its  unveilings,  and  through  its  benefits  and  effulgences,  it  is  a  clear 
proof of the truths and the matters which the Shari‘a teaches; it demonstrates that they 
are  the  truth  and  that  they  come from  the  truth.  Yes,  just  as  sainthood  and  the  Sufi 
path  are  evidence  and  proof  of  divine  messengership  and  the  Shari‘a,  so  they  are  a 
perfection of Islam and a means of attaining to its lights, and through Islam, a source 
of humanity’s progress and moral enlightenment. 

Although  this  vast  mystery  holds  such  importance,  certain  deviant  sects  have 
tended  to  deny  it.  They  have  been  deprived  of  those  lights  and  they  have  caused 
others to be deprived. The most regretable thing is that making a pretext of abuses and 
faults  they  have  seen  committed  by  the  followers  of  the  Sufi  path,  some  literalist 
Sunni scholars and some neglectful politicians who are also Sunnis are trying to close 
up that supreme treasury, indeed, to destroy it, and to dry up that source of Kawthar 
which distributes a sort of water of life. However, there are few things and ways and 
paths that are without fault and are good in every respect. They are bound to contain 
some faults and abuses. For if the uninitiated embark on something, they are sure to 
misuse  it.  But  as  with  the  accounting  of  deeds  in  the  hereafter,  Almighty  God 
demonstrates  His dominical  justice through  the  weighing  up of good deeds and bad 
deeds. That is to say, if good deeds preponderate and weigh heavier, He accepts them 
and  grants  reward;  whereas  if  evil  deeds  preponderate,  he  punishes  for  them  and 
rejects  them.  The  balancing  of  good  and  evil  deeds  looks  to  quality  rather  than 
quantity.  It  sometimes  happens  that  a  single  good  deed  will  weigh  heavier  than  a 
thousand evils, and cause them to be forgiven. Divine justice judges thus and reality 
too considers it right. Thus, the evidence that the good deeds of the Sufi path – that is, 
paths within the bounds of the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices – definitely preponderate 
over their evils is that those who follow them preserve their belief when attacked by 
the  people  of  misguidance.  A  sincere  ordinary  follower  of  the  Sufi  path  preserves 
himself  better  than  a  superficial,  apparent  Muslim  with  a  modern,  scientific 
background. Through the  illumination of the Sufi path and the love of the saints, he 
saves  his  faith.  If  he  commits  grievous  sins,  he  becomes  a  sinner  but  not  an 
unbeliever; he is not easily drawn into atheism. No power at all can refute the chain of 
shaikhs  he  accepts,  with  a  strong  love  and  firm  belief,  to  be  spiritual  poles.  And 
because no power can refute it, his confidence in them cannot be shaken. And so long 
as his confidence is not shaken, he will not accept atheism. In the face of the atheists’ 
stratagems at the present time, it has become diffi 

 

510

cult for a person unconnected with the Sufi path, whose heart has not been brought to 
action, to preserve himself completely, even if he is a learned scholar. 

There  is  another  thing;  the  Sufi  path  should  not  be  condemned  because  of  the 
evils  of  some  orders  that  have  adopted  practices  outside  the  bounds  of  taqwa,  and 
even of Islam, and have wrongfully called themselves Sufi paths. Quite apart from the 
elevated  religious  and  spiritual  fruits  of  the  Sufi  path  and  those  that  look  to  the 
hereafter,  Sufi  orders  were  the  first,  and  most  effective  and  ardent,  means  of 
spreading and strengthening brotherhood, the sacred bond of the Islamic world. They 
were also one of the three unassailable  strongholds of Islam, which held out against 
the awesome attacks of the world of unbelief and the politics of Christendom. What 
preserved Istanbul, the centre of the Caliphate for five hundred and fifty years against 
the  whole Christian  world,  were  the  lights  of  belief  that  poured out of  five  hundred 
places in Istanbul and the powerful faith of those who recited “Allah! Allah!” in the 
tekkes behind the big mosques, which were a firm source of support for the people of 
belief in that centre of Islam, and their spiritual love arising from knowledge of God, 
and their fervent murmurings. 

O you unreasoning pseudo-patriots and false nationalists! What evils are there in 

the Sufi paths that can negate all this good in the life of your society? You say! 

Fourth Allusion 

Together  with  being  very  easy,  the  way  of  sainthood is very  difficult.  Together 
with  being  very  short,  it  is  very  long.  In  addition  to being  most  valuable,  it  is  very 
dangerous.  And  together  with  being  very  broad,  it  is  very  narrow.  It  is  because  of 
these points that some of those who take the path drown, others become harmful, and 
yet others return and lead other people astray. 

I n  S h o r t : There are two ways on the Sufi path, known by the terms of inner 

journeying and outer journeying. 

The Inner Way starts from the self, and drawing the eyes away from the outer 
world, looks to the heart. It pierces egotism, opens up a way from the heart, and finds 
reality.  Then  it  enters  the  outer  world.  The  outer  world  then  looks  luminous.  The 
journey is completed quickly on this way. The reality seen in the inner world, is seen 
on a large scale in the outer world. Most of the paths that practise silent recollection 
take this way. Its essential principles are breaking the ego, renouncing the desires of 
the flesh, and killing the evil-commanding soul. 

 

511

The Second Way starts  from the outer world; it gazes on the reflections of the 
divine names and attributes in their places of manifestation in the greater sphere, then 
it enters the inner world. It observes their lights on a small scale in the sphere of the 
heart and opens up the shortest way within them. It sees that the heart is a mirror to 
the Eternally Besoughted One, and is united with the goal it is seeking. 

If  people  who  travel  the  first  way  are  unsuccessful  in  killing  the  evil-
commanding  soul,  and  if  they cannot  give  up  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  break  the 
ego,  they  fall  from  the  rank  of  thanks  to  that  of  pride,  then  descend  from  pride  to 
conceit. If such a person feels the captivation of love and becomes intoxicated by it, 
he  will  make  high-flown  claims  far  exceeding  his  mark,  called  ecstatic  utterances. 
This is harmful both for himself and for others. 

For example, if a lieutenant becomes conceited out of pleasure at his position of 
command,  he  will  suppose himself to  be  a  field  marshal  and  will  confuse  his  small 
sphere  with  the universal one.  He  will  confuse a  sun  that  appears  in  a  small  mirror 
with the sun whose manifestation appears in all its splendour on the surface of the sea, 
due to their similarity in one respect.  

In  just  the  same  way,  there  are  many  people  of  sainthood  who,  resembling  the 
difference between a fly and a peacock, see themselves as greater than those who in 
reality are greater than them to the same degree; that is how they see it and they think 
they are right. I myself even saw someone whose heart had just been awakened and 
had faintly perceived in himself the mystery of sainthood; he supposed himself to be 
the supreme spiritual pole and assumed airs accordingly. I said to him: “My brother, 
just  as  the  law  of  sovereignty  has  particular  and  universal  manifestations  from  the 
office of Prime Minister down to that of District Officer, so sainthood and the rank of 
spiritual pole have varying spheres and manifestations. Each station has many shades 
and  shadows.  You  have  evidently  seen  the  manifestation  of  the  rank  of  supreme 
spiritual pole, the equivalent of Prime Minister, in your own sphere, which is like that 
of a District Officer, and you have been deceived. What you saw was right, but your 
judgement of it was wrong. To a fly, a cup of water is a small sea.” The person came 
to his senses, God willing, as a result of this answer of mine, and was saved from the 
abyss. 

I have also seen many people who thought themselves to be Mahdis of a sort, and 
they  proclaimed  their  Mahdiship.  Such  people  are  not  liars  and  deceivers,  they  are 
deceived.  They  suppose  what  they  see  to  be  reality.  As  the  divine  names  have 
manifestations from the sphere of the Sublime  

 

512

Throne down to an atom, and their places of manifestation differ to the same degree; 
so  the  degrees  of  sainthood,  which  consist  of  manifesting  the  names,  differ  in  the 
same way. The most important reason for the confusion is this: 

 In some of the stations of the saints, the characteristics of the Mahdi’s function 
may  be  observed,  or  a  special  relation  may  be  formed  with  the  Supreme  Spiritual 
Pole,  or  with  Khidr;  certain  stations  are  connected  with  certain  famous  persons.  In 
fact, the stations are called the station of Khidr, the station of Uwais, or the station of 
the Mahdi. Because of this, people who attain to these stations or to minor samples or 
shadows of them, suppose themselves to be the famous persons connected with them. 
They suppose themselves to be Khidr, or the Mahdi, or the Supreme Spiritual Pole. If 
such a person’s ego does not seek rank and position, he is not condemned to the state. 
His  excessively  high-flown  claims  are  deemed  ecstatic  utterances  for  which  he  is 
probably not responsible. But if his ego is secretly set on acquiring rank and position, 
and if he defeated by it and leaves off thanks and becomes proud, from there he will 
gradually fall into arrogance, or descend to the depths of madness, or deviate from the 
path of truth. For he reckons the great saints to be like himself and his good opinion 
of them is spoiled, for       however arrogant a soul is, it still perceives its own faults. 
Comparing  those  great  saints  with  himself,  he  imagines  them  to  be  at  fault.  His 
respect towards the prophets diminishes, even. 

Those suffering from this should hold fast to the balance of the Shari‘a, and adopt 
the  rules  of  the  scholars  of  the  principles  of  religion,  and  take  as  their  guides  the 
instructions of such authoritative scholars from among the saints as Imam Ghazali and 
Imam-i Rabbani. They should constantly accuse their own souls, and attribute nothing 
to  themselves  other  than  fault,  impotence,  and  want.  Ecstatic  utterances  made  by 
followers  of  this  way  arise  from  love  of  self,  for  love-filled  eyes  see  no  faults. 
Because of his self-love, such a person supposes a faulty, unworthy fragment of glass 
to  be  a  brilliant  or  a  diamond.  The  most  dangerous  of  all  these  faults  is  that  he 
imagines the partial meanings which occur to his heart in the form of inspiration to be 
“God’s  Word,”  and  he  calls  them  “verses  (âyât).”  This  infers  disrespect  towards 
divine revelation, which is at the most holy and exalted degree. Yes, all  inspirations 
from  the  inspirations  of  bees  and  animals  to  those  of  ordinary  people  and  the  elite 
among  men,  and  from  the  inspirations  of  ordinary  angels  to  those  of  the  sublime 
cherubim,  are  divine  words  of  a  sort.  But  they  are  dominical  speech  in  conformity 
with the capacity of the places of manifestation and their stations; they are the varying 
manifestations of dominical address shining through seventy thousand veils. 

 

513

However, it is absolutely wrong to use the proper nouns “revelation” and “divine 
speech”  for  such  inspirations,  and  the  word  “verse,”  which  is  a  noun  proper  to  the 
stars of the Qur’an – the most evident exemplification of God’s Word. As is explained 
and  proved  in  the  Twelfth,  Twenty-Fifth,  and  Thirty-First  Words,  the  relation 
between the inspiration in the hearts of those making the above claims and the verses 
of  the  sun  of  the  Qur’an,  which  is  divine  speech  directly,  resembles  the  relation 
between the tiny, dim, obscure image of the sun appearing  in the coloured mirror in 
your  hand  and  the  sun  in  the  sky.  Yes,  if  it  is  said  that  the  sun’s  reflected  images 
appearing  in all mirrors are the sun’s  and are related to it, it would be right, but the 
globe of the earth cannot be attached to the suns in those tiny mirrors, nor be bound 
by their attraction. 

Fifth Allusion 

An extremely important way within Sufism is the Unity of Witnessing, which is 
another name for the Unity of Existence. This restricts the gaze to the existence of the 
Necessarily Existent, and sees other beings to be so weak and shadow-like in relation 
to  Him  that  it  declares  that  they  do  not  deserve  the  name  of  existence.  It  envelops 
them  in  veils  of  imagination,  and  in  the  station  of  abandoning  all  things  other  than 
God, counts them as nothing. It even  imagines them to be non-existent, and goes so 
far  as  to  belittle  the  manifestations  of  the  divine  names,  saying  they  are  mere 
imaginary mirrors. 

A significant fact about this way is that due to the powerful faith it inculcates and 
the elevated sainthood of those on it advancing to the degree of absolute certainty, the 
existence of contingent beings is so diminished that nothing remains in its view other 
than imagination and non-existence; it is as though it denies the universe on account 
of the Necessarily Existent One. 

But this way holds dangers, the first of which is this: there are six pillars of faith, 
and such pillars as belief  in the  Last Day and belief  in God require the existence of 
contingent  beings.  These  firmly-founded  pillars  of  belief  cannot  be  constructed  on 
imagination! For this reason, when a person following this way re-enters the world of 
sobriety  from the worlds of ecstasy  and intoxication,  he should not bring them with 
him, nor should he act in accordance with them.  

Furthermore, he  should not convert this way, which pertains to the  heart and to 
illuminations  and  certain  states,  into  a  form  that  pertains  to  the  reason,  knowledge, 
and  words.  For  the  laws  and  principles  related  to  reason,  knowledge,  and  speech, 
which proceed from the Qur’an and the practices  

 

514

of  the  Prophet  (UWBP),  cannot  sustain  that  way  and  are  inapplicable  to  it.  For  this 
reason, the  four Rightly-Guided Caliphs, and the  leading authorities  and interpreters 
of  the  law,  and  the  authorities  of  the  first  generations  of  Islam  were  not  seen  to 
practise it. This means that it is not the most elevated way. It may be elevated, but it is 
also deficient. It is very important, but it is also very perilous and difficult. Yet, it is 
still very pleasurable. Those who embark on it for the pleasure, do not want to leave 
it, and because of their self-centredness, they suppose it to be the highest degree. We 
have  explained  the  basis  and  nature  of  this  way  to  an  extent  in  the  treatise  called 
Nokta  Risalesi,  and  in  some  of  the  Words  and  Letters,  and  shall  suffice  with  them. 
Here,  we  shall  describe  one  of  the  serious  hazards  on  that  important  way.  It  is  as 
follows: 

For the highest of the elite, who pass beyond the sphere of causes and renouncing 
everything  other  than  God,  sever  their  attachment  to  contingent  beings  and  enter  a 
state of complete absorption in God, this way is a righteous way. But, to present it in 
terms of intellectual knowledge to those who are submerged in causes, are enamoured 
of the world, and are plunged into materialist philosophy and nature, will drown them 
in nature and materiality and distance them from the reality of Islam. For those who 
love  the  world  and  are  attached  to  the  sphere  of  causes  want  to  ascribe  a  sort  of 
permanence to this transitory world. They do not want to lose their beloved. On the 
pretext  of  the  Unity  of  Existence,  they  imagine  it  to  have  permanent  existence.  On 
account of  the  world, their  beloved,  and by  ascribing  permanence  and  eternity  to  it, 
they make it an object of worship; and, I seek refuge with God, this paves the way to 
the abyss of denying God. 

This century, materialism is so widespread, materiality is thought to be the source 
of  everything.  If  in  such  an  age,  the  elite  believers  consider  materiality  to  be  so 
unimportant as to be non-existent, thus furthering the way of the Unity of Existence, 
the materialists will lay claim to it, saying: “We say the same thing.” Whereas, among 
all  the  ways  in  the  world,  the  one  furthest  from  that  of  the  materialists  and  nature-
worshippers, is the way of the  Unity of Existence. For the followers of the Unity of 
Existence attach such importance, due to their belief, to the divine existence that they 
deny the universe and beings. Whereas the materialists attach so much importance to 
beings that on account of the universe they deny God. How can the two come together 
or be compared? 

 

515

Sixth Allusion 

This consists of three points. 
F i r s t  P o i n t : Among the ways of sainthood, the finest, straightest, richest, 
and most brilliant is following the practices (Sunna) of the Prophet (UWBP). That is, 
to think of the practices in one’s actions and deeds, and to follow and imitate them. In 
conduct and dealings with others, it is to think of the rulings of the Shari‘a and take 
them as one’s guide. 

When  followed  in  this  way,  daily  conduct,  dealings,  and  habitual  acts  become 
worship,  and  thinking  of  the  practices  and  Shari‘a  in  one’s  actions,  recalls  the 
injunctions  of  the  Shari‘a.  This  causes  a  person  to  think  of  the  Shari‘a’s  owner.  By 
thinking of him, it brings to mind Almighty God, and that induces a sort of sense of 
His presence. This may transform all the moments of the person’s life into worship in 
the  divine  presence.  This  great  highway  is  the  highway  of  the  Companions  and the 
righteous of  the  first  generations  of  Islam,  who  received  the  legacy  of  prophethood, 
the greater sainthood. 

S e c o n d  P o i n t : Sincerity is the basis of the ways of sainthood and of the 
branches of the Sufi path, for through sincerity a person may be saved from implicitly 
associating partners with God. One who does not obtain sincerity cannot travel those 
ways. The most powerful force of those ways is love. Yes, love does not seek pretexts 
for its beloved and does not wish to see the beloved’s faults. It looks on frail signs of 
its beloved’s perfection as powerful proofs, and always takes the part of its beloved. 

It is because of this that those who are turned towards knowledge of God with the 
feet of love, do not give ear to doubts and objections; they  are easily  saved. Even a 
thousand satans can not negate a hint of their true beloved’s perfection. If they do not 
possess such love, they would struggle desperately in the face of their souls and Satan 
and the objections of the outside devils. They would have to have heroic fortitude and 
strength of belief and an attentive gaze in order to save themselves. 

It is because of this that in all the degrees of sainthood, the chief leaven and elixir 
is the love arising from knowledge of God. But love leads to an abyss, which is this: it 
jumps  from  beseeching  and  self-effacement,  which  are  the  essence  of  worship,  to 
complaint  and  claims  and  to  imbalanced  actions.  When  regarding  things  other  than 
God, a person ceases to see  how they point to their Maker and starts to see them as 
signifying themselves alone, so while being the cure, love becomes poison. That is to 
say, although when  loving things other than God, the person should fix  his  heart on 
them for God’s sake and in His name and because they are mirrors  

 

516

reflecting His names, sometimes he loves them for themselves and on account of their 
personal perfections and own beauty. He loves them with no thought for God and His 
Messenger (UWBP). Such love does not lead to love of God; it obscures it. Whereas 
if  the  person  loves  those  things  as  signifying  their  Maker,  it  leads  to  love  of  God; 
indeed, such love may be said to be its manifestation. 

T h i r d  P o i n t : This world is the realm of wisdom, the realm of service; it is 
not the realm of reward and recompense. The wage for deeds and acts of service here 
is  given  in the Intermediate  Realm and the  hereafter. Acts here produce fruits there. 
This  being  the  truth  of  the  matter,  the  results  of  actions  that  look  to  the  hereafter 
should  not  be  sought  in  this  world.  If  they  are  given,  they  should  be  received  not 
gratefully,  but  regretfully.  For  in  Paradise,  the  more  fruits  are  picked  the  more  they 
grow. So it is hardly sensible to consume in this world in fleeting fashion the fruits of 
actions  that  pertain  to  the  hereafter,  which  are    lasting.  It  is  like  exchanging  a 
permanent lamp for one that will last a minute and then flicker out. 

It  is  because  of  this  that  the  people  of  sainthood  look  on  service,  difficulty, 
misfortune,  and  hardship  as  agreeable.  They  do  not  complain  and  lament,  but  say: 
“All praise be to God for all situations!” When illuminations and wonders, unfoldings 
and  lights  are  bestowed  on  them,  they  accept  them  as  divine  favours,  and  try  to 
conceal them. They do not become proud, but offer more thanks and worship. Many 
of  them  have  wanted  those  states  to  be  concealed  or  to  cease,  lest  they  spoil  the 
sincerity  of  their  actions.  Yes,  the  highest  divine  favour  for an  acceptable  person  is 
not  to  make  him  realize  the  favour,  so  that  he  does  not  give  up  beseeching  and 
offering thanks, or become complacent and start complaining. 

It  is  because  of  this  truth  that  if  those  who  seek  sainthood  and  follow  the  Sufi 
path  do  so  for  illuminations  and  wonders,  which  are  some  of  the  emanations  of 
sainthood, and they are turned towards those and receive pleasure from them, they as 
though consume in transient fashion in this transient world the enduring fruits of the 
hereafter. This too opens up the way to loss of sincerity, the leaven of sainthood, and 
to sainthood eluding them.  

Seventh Allusion 

This consists of four points. 
F i r s t  P o i n t : The Shari‘a is directly, without shadow or veil, the result of 
the  divine  address,  through  the  mystery  of  divine  oneness  in  respect  of  absolute 
dominicalitY. The highest degrees of the Sufi path and of reality are like parts of the 
Shari‘a. Or they are always like its means, introduction, and servant. Their results are 
the incontrovertible matters of  

 

517

the Shari‘a. That is to say, the ways of the Sufi orders and of reality are like means, 
servants, and steps for reaching the truths of the Shari‘a, till at the highest level they 
are transformed into the meaning of reality and essence of the Sufi way, which are at 
the  heart  of  the  Shari‘a.  So then  they  become  parts  of  the  Greater  Shari‘a.  It  is  not 
right to think of the Shari‘a as an outer shell and reality as its inner part and result and 
aim, as some Sufis do. Yes, the Shari‘a unfolds according to the levels of men. It is 
wrong to suppose that what the mass of people imagine  is the external aspect of the 
Shari‘a is its reality, and to give the names of reality and Sufi path to the degrees of 
the Shari‘a that are disclosed to the elite. The Shari‘a  has degrees which  look to all 
classes. 

It is in consequence of this that the further the Sufis and those who seek reality 
advance, their longing for the truths of the Shari‘a increases, as does their captivation 
by  them  and  their  following  them.  They  consider  the  most  minor  aspect  of  the 
Prophet’s  (UWBP)  practices to  be  their  greatest  aim,  and  strive  to  follow  them  and 
imitate them. For however higher divine revelation is than inspiration, the conduct of 
the  Shari‘a,  which  is  the  fruit  of  revelation,  is  higher  to  the  same  degree  than  the 
conduct of  the  Sufi  path,  the  fruit  of  inspiration.  Therefore,  following  the  Prophet’s 
(UWBP) practices is the basis and principal element of the Sufi path. 

S e c o n d  P o i n t : The Sufi path and way of reality should not exceed being 
means. If they are made the ultimate aim, the incontrovertible teachings and actions of 
the  Shari‘a  and  following  the  practices  of  the  Prophet  (UWBP)  become  merely  a 
matter  of  form,  while  the  heart  looks  beyond  them.  That  is  to  say,  such  a  person 
thinks of his circle for the remembrance of God rather than the obligatory prayers; he 
is drawn more to his recitations and supplications than to his religious obligations; he 
is more concerned with avoiding offending against his order’s rules of behaviour than 
with  avoiding  grievous  sins.  Whereas  the  recitations  of  the  Sufi  path  cannot  be  the 
equivalent  of  the  obligatory  acts  that  constitute  the  incontestible  matters  of  the 
Shari‘a; they cannot take their place. The etiquette of the Sufi path and its invocations 
should be a solace and a way of obtaining true pleasure from the obligatory acts; they 
should  not  themselves  be  the  source.  That  is,  the  tekke  should  lead  a  person  to 
perform the five daily prayers assiduously  in the mosque. If he performs them there 
hurriedly as a formality, thinking that he will find true pleasure and perfection in the 
tekke, he is drawing away from reality.  

T h i r d  P o i n t : It is sometimes asked: “Can there be any Sufi path outside 

the practices of the Prophet (UWBP) and matters of the Shari‘a?” 
T h e  A n s w e r :  There are some such paths, and there are  

 

518

not. There are, because some of the highest saints were executed by the sword of the 
Shari‘a. And there are  not, because the authoritative  scholars  among the  saints have 
agreed on this rule of Sa‘di-i Shirazi: “It is impossible, Sa‘di, to be victorious on the 
way of felicity, except by following the Chosen One.” That is, it is impossible for one 
outside the highway of God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace), who 
does  not  follow  him,  to  attain  the  true  lights  of  reality.  The  meaning  of  this  is  as 
follows:  

God’s    Messenger    (Peace  and  blessings  be  upon  him)  was  the  Seal  of  the 
Prophets  and  the  addressee  of  God  in  the  name  of  all  mankind;  mankind,  therefore, 
cannot advance outside his highway; it is essential to be under his banner. But since 
ecstatics  and  those  immersed  in  divine  contemplation  are  not  responsible  for  their 
opposition;  and  since  man  possesses  certain  subtle  faculties  that  are  not  held 
accountable,  and  when  such  faculties  dominate  a  person,  he  cannot  be  held 
responsible  for  opposing  the  obligations  of  the  Shari‘a;  and  since  man  possesses 
subtle  faculties  that  just  as  they  are  not  accountable,  so  they  are  not  under  the 
jurisdiction of the will and cannot be controlled by the mind, for they do not heed the 
heart or the mind; certainly, when those faculties dominate in a person, – but only at 
that time – he does not fall from the rank of sainthood by opposing the Shari‘a, he is 
held excused. On condition, however, that he does not deny or insult the truths of the 
Shari‘a  and  rules  of  belief,  or  display  contempt  towards  them.  Even  if  he  does  not 
carry  out  the  injunctions,  he  has  to  acknowledge  that  they  are  right.  But  if  he  is 
overcome by that state and assumes a position, I seek refuge with God, which infers 
denial and giving the lie to those incontestible truths, it is the sign that he has deviated 
from the path! 

I n  S h o r t :  There are two groups that follow the Sufi path outside the bounds 

of the Shari‘a. 

One  group:  As  described  above,  these  people  are  either  overwhelmed  by  their 
mental state, immersion, or ecstasy or intoxication, or they are dominated by some of 
their subtle faculties that do not heed the injunctions of religion nor listen to the will; 
they  therefore  transgress  the  bounds  of  the  Shari‘a.  But  this  is  not  due  to  their 
disliking  its  rulings  or  not  wanting  to  follow  them;  they  are  rather  compelled  to, 
involuntarily.  Among  this  group  are  people  of  sainthood  some  of  whom  have  even 
been  temporary  saints  of  high  rank.  But  the  authoritative  scholars  from  among  the 
saints  have  ruled  that  of  these  some  have  been  not  only  outside  the  bounds  of  the 
Shari‘a,  but  outside  the  bounds  of  Islam.  But  they  are  considered  to  be  people  of 
sainthood  on  condition  they  have  not  denied  any  of  the  injunctions  brought  by 
Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him). It is that they do not think  

 

519

of  them,  or  cannot  keep  them  in  view,  or  are  not  aware  of  them.  They  cannot  not 
accept them if they are aware of them. 

As for the Second Group, they are carried away by the brilliant pleasures of the 
Sufi path and way of reality, and since they cannot attain to the pleasures of the truths 
of the Shari‘a, which are far more elevated, they suppose them to be dull formalities 
and are indifferent towards them. They gradually accept the idea that the Shari‘a is an 
external shell, and that the reality they have found is the essential goal. They say: “I 
have found it; it is enough for me,” and act in a way contrary to the injunctions of the 
Shari‘a.  Any  in  this  group  who  are  in  their  right  minds  are  responsible;  they  stray 
from the path, indeed, become the playthings of Satan to an extent. 

F o u r t h  P o i n t :  Some persons who belong to the divisions of the people of 
misguidance  and  innovation  are  found  acceptable  by  the Muslim  community,  while 
others,  just  like  them  and  not  apparently  different,  are  rejected.  I  always  used  to 
wonder about this. For example, although someone like Zamakhshari was one of the 
most bigoted members of the Mu‘tazilite sect, the authoritative Sunni scholars did not 
pronounce him an unbeliever or misguided, despite his severe objections; they rather 
searched  for  a  way  to  exonerate  him. But  then  they  held  that  Mu‘tazilite  authorities 
like Abu ‘Ali Jubba’i, who was far less bigoted than Zamakhshari, should be rejected 
and  refuted.  I  was  curious  about  this  for  a  long  time.  Then  through  divine  grace  I 
understood that Zamakhshari’s objections about the Sunnis arose from his love of his 
way, which he looked on as right.  

That  is  to  say,  for  example,  in  his  view  God  could  be  truly  declared  free  of  all 
fault and defect by saying that animals create their own actions. It was out of love for 
declaring God free of all fault that he did not accept the Sunnis’ principles concerning 
the  creation  of  actions.  Whereas  the  other  Mu‘tazilite  authorities  were  rejected 
because  their  inadequate  intelligences  could  not  aspire  to  the  elevated  principles  of 
the Sunnis and they could not fit the Sunnis’ extensive laws within their own narrow 
ideas, and so denied them. In the same way that the Mu‘tazilites opposed the Sunnis 
in theology, so the opposition of some followers of the Sufi path outside the Prophet’s 
(UWBP) practices is of two kinds: 

The  first:  Like  Zamakhshari,  out  of  love  for  their  way  or  state,  they  remain 
somewhat  indifferent  towards  the  conduct  of  the  Shari‘a,  because  through  it  they 
cannot obtain the same degree of pleasure. 

As  for  the  other  kind:    God  forbid!  They  think  the  conduct  of  the  Shari‘a  is 
unimportant  relatively  to  the  principles  of  the  Sufi  path.  For  their  narrow 
understandings  cannot  comprehend  those  broad  pleasures,  and  their  short  stations 
cannot attain to that elevated conduct. 

 

520

Eighth Allusion 

This describes eight abysses. 
The  First:  Some  people  who  embark  on  spiritual  journeying  do  not  conform 
completely  to  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  practices,  and  fall  into  the  abyss of  preferring 
sainthood to prophethood. It is proved in the Twenty-Fourth and Thirty-First Words 
how elevated is prophethood, and how dull sainthood is in relation to it. 

The Second: Some of followers of the Sufi path fall into the abyss of preferring 
extremist  saints  to  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  Companions  and  even  of  believing  those 
saints  to  be  prophets.  It  is  proved  decisively  in  the  Twelfth  and  Twenty-Seventh 
Words and in the Addendum on the Companions, that the Companions acquired such 
qualities  through  conversation  with  the  Prophet  (UWBP)  that  cannot  be  attained 
through sainthood, and that the Companions cannot be surpassed, and that the saints 
can never reach the degree of the Companions. 

The Third: Some of those who are excessively bigoted concerning the Sufi path 
oppose  the  practices  of  the  Prophet  (UWBP)  and  give  them  up  because  of  their 
preference for the customs, conduct, and recitations of the Sufi way, which they never 
give up. In this way, they become slack in practising the conduct of the Shari‘a, and 
fall into that abyss. 

As is proved in many of the Words, and as veracious authorities of the Sufi path 
like  Imam  Ghazali  and  Imam-i  Rabbani  said:  “The  degree  of  acceptance  gained  by 
following  a  single  of  the  Prophet’s  (UWBP)  practices  cannot  be  won  through  a 
hundred personal practices  and  supererogatory  acts  of  worship.  And  just  as  a  single 
obligatory act is  superior to a thousand acts taken from the Prophet’s practices, so a 
single of those practices is superior to a thousand practices of Sufism.” 

The  Fourth:  Some  extremist  Sufis  suppose  inspiration  to  be  like  divine 
revelation and of similar kind to revelation, and fall into an abyss. It has been proved 
most  definitely  in  the  Twelfth  Word  and  in  the  Twenty-Fifth  Word  about  the 
miraculousness  of  the  Qur’an,  how  elevated,  universal,  and  sacred  is  divine 
revelation, and how insignificant and dull inspirations are in comparison. 

The  Fifth:  Some  Sufis  who  do  not  understand  the  essence  of  the  Sufi  path,  in 
order  to  strengthen  the  weak,  encourage  the  slack,  and  to  lighten  the  hardships  and 
weariness arising from strenuous service, find the lights, illuminations, and wonders, 
which  are  not  sought  but  given,  to  be  pleasurable,  and  they  become  captivated  by 
them  and  fall  into  the  abyss  of  preferring  them  to  worship,  acts  of  service,  and 
recitation of supplications. It is  

 

521

mentioned briefly in the Third Point of the Sixth Allusion in the present treatise and 
proved decisively  in  others  of  the  Words  that  this  world  is  the  realm  of  service  and 
not  the  realm  of  reward.  People  who  seek  their  recompense  here,  both  transform 
enduring,  perpetual  fruits into  a  transitory,  temporary  form,  and find  permanence  in 
this  world pleasing,  so they  do  not  yearn  for  the  Intermediate  Realm. Quite  simply, 
they love the life of this world in one respect, since they find a sort of hereafter within 
it. 

The Sixth: Some of those who embark on spiritual journeying fall into an abyss 
by confusing the shades and shadows and partial samples of the stations of sainthood 
with its fundamental, universal stations. As is proved clearly in the Second Branch of 
the Twenty-Fourth Word and in others of the Words, the sun becomes numerous by 
means of mirrors and thousands of its similitudes possess light and heat like the sun 
itself, despite their paltriness in relation to the actual sun. In exactly the same way, the 
stations of the prophets and the great saints possess shades and shadows. Those who 
journey  with  the  spirit  enter  these,  and  see  themselves  as  greater  than  those  great 
saints, or even to have advanced further than the prophets, and so fall into an abyss. 
However,  the  way  to  avoid  this  is  to  always  take  the  principles  of  belief  and 
fundamentals  of  the  Shari‘a  as  one’s  basis  and  guide,  and  to  look  on  one’s 
illuminations and visions as opposed to them. 

The Seventh: Some of the people of illumination and ecstasy fall into an abyss in 
their  spiritual  journeyings  by  preferring  pride,  complaint,  ecstatic  utterances,  public 
regard,  and  being  referred  to,  to  offering  thanks  and  supplication,  beseeching 
Almighty  God,  and  self-sufficiency.  Whereas  the  highest  degree  is  Muhammadan 
worship,  which  is  termed  “belovedness.”  The  basis  and  essence  of  worship  is  to 
manifest the perfection of that reality by supplicating and beseeching Almighty God, 
showing deep humility before Him, offering thanks, and through impotence and want, 
and by displaying self-sufficiency in the face of others. Some of the great saints have 
involuntarily  and  temporarily  become  proud  and  made  complaints  and  ecstatic 
utterances,  but  they  should  not  be  followed  voluntarily  on  such  points;  they  are 
rightly-guided but not the guide; their way may not be taken! 

The  Eighth  Abyss:  Some of  those  who  journey  spiritually  are  self-centred  and 
precipitate and want to consume in this world the fruits of  sainthood, which will be 
given  in  the  hereafter;  they  fall  into  an  abyss  by  seeking  them  on  their  spiritual 
journeyings. But, as such verses as,  

“The life of this world is but goods and chattels”(3:185)  

proclaim, and as is proved decisively in many of the Words, a single fruit  

 

522

in  the realm  of  eternity  is  superior to  a  thousand gardens  in  this  fleeting  world.  For 
this reason, those blessed fruits should not be consumed here. If without being sought 
they  are  given  to  eat  here,  they  should  be  thanked  for,  and  deemed  divine  favours 
bestowed, not as reward, but for encouragement. 

Ninth Allusion 

of the Sufi path. 

Here we shall describe briefly nine out of the truly numerous fruits and benefits 

The First  is the unfolding and clarification, by means of the Sufi paths that are 
on the straight way, of the truths of faith, which are the keys, sources, and springs of 
the eternal treasuries of everlasting happiness; it is their manifestation at the degree of 
the vision of certainty. 

The Second: Since the Sufi path is a means of working the heart, the mainspring 
of the human machine, and of causing it to stir the other subtle faculties into motion, 
it drives them to fulfil the purposes of their creation and thus makes a person into a 
true human being. 

The  Third:  On  the  journey  to  the  Intermediate  Realm and  the  hereafter,  it  is  to 
join one of the lines of the Sufi orders, and become a member of its luminous caravan 
on  the  road  to  eternity.  The  person  is  thus  saved  from  loneliness  and  finds  the 
friendship  of  the  other  members  in  this  world  and  in  the  Intermediate  Realm;  and 
relying on their consensus and accord in the  face of the attacks of doubts and fears, 
and seeing each of their masters as a powerful support and proof, he repulses through 
them those doubts and instances of misguidance. 

The  Fourth  is  to  understand  by  means  of  the  pure  Sufi  way  the  knowledge  of 
God  to  be  found  in  belief  in  God,  and  the  pleasure  of  love  of  God  within  the 
knowledge of God, and by so understanding, to be saved from the desolation of this 
world and man’s exile in the universe. We have proved in many of the Words that the 
happiness  of  both  worlds,  and  pain-free  pleasure,  and  intimacy  untainted  by 
loneliness, and true delight, and untroubled happiness are all to be found in faith and 
the reality of Islam. As is explained in the Second Word, faith produces the seed of a 
Tuba-tree of Paradise. It is through the training and nurturing of the Sufi path that the 
seed grows and develops. 

The  Fifth  is  to perceive  through  an  awakening  of  the  heart elicited  by  the  Sufi 
path  and  remembrance  of  God,  the  subtle  truths  contained  in  the  obligations  of  the 
Shari‘a, and to appreciate them. Then the person obeys and performs his worship, not 
under compulsion, but with longing. 

The Sixth is to rise to the station of reliance on God and the rank of sub 

 

523

mission  to  Him  and  winning  His  pleasure,  which  are  the  means  of  obtaining  true 
delight, real solace, painfree pleasure, and friendship untainted by loneliness. 

The  Seventh  is,  through  sincerity,  which  is  the  essential  precondition  for 
travelling  the  Sufi  way  and  its  most  valuable  result,  to  be  delivered  from  base 
qualities like implicitly associating partners with God, hypocrisy, and artificiality. It is 
also to be saved, through purifying the soul, which is like the surgical operation of the 
Sufi path, from the dangers of the evil-commanding soul and the perils of egotism. 

The  Eighth:  Through  the  regard,  sense  of  the  divine  presence,  and  powerful 
intentions of the Sufi path, gained by recalling God with the  heart and reflecting on 
Him  with  the  mind,  this  is  to  transform  customary  actions  into  worship  and  make 
mundane dealings into actions benefiting the hereafter. Utilizing the capital of life, it 
is to make all its minutes into seeds that will produce the shoots of eternal happiness. 

The Ninth is to struggle to be a perfect human being through journeying with the 
heart  and  striving  with  the  spirit  and  spiritual  progress;  that  is  to  say,  to  be  a  true 
believer  and  total  Muslim;  that  is,  to  gain  not  superficial  belief,  but  the  reality  of 
belief  and  the  reality  of  Islam;  that  is,  to  be  directly  the  bondsman  of  the  Glorious 
Creator  of  the  Universe,  in  the  universe  and  in  one  respect  as  the  universe’s 
representative, and to be His addressee, and friend, and beloved, and to be a mirror to 
Him;  and  through  showing  man  to  be  on  the  best  of  patterns,  it  is  to  prove  man’s 
superiority to the angels. It is to fly through the lofty stations with the Shari‘a’s wings 
of  faith and  works,  and to behold  eternal  happiness  in this  world,  and  even  to  enter 
upon it. 

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught 
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise!(2:32) 
O God! Grant blessings and peace to the Supreme Help in every age and the 
Sublime Spiritual Pole at all times, our master Muhammad, the magnificence 
of whose sainthood was manifested in his Ascension, as was the station of his 
being  the  beloved  of  God,  and  under  the  shadow  of  whose  Ascension  are 
included all sainthoods, and to all his Family and Companions. Amen. And 
all praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds. 

 

524

Addendum 

 [This  short  addendum  has  great  importance;  it  is 
beneficial for everyone.] 

In the Name of God, the Merciful, 
the Compassionate. 

The ways  leading to Almighty God are truly  numerous. While all true ways are 
taken from the Qur’an, some are shorter, safer, and more general than others. Of these 
ways taken from the Qur’an is that of impotence, poverty, compassion, and reflection, 
from which, with my defective understanding, I have benefited. 

like  ecstatic 

Like  ecstatic  love,  impotence  is  a  path  which,  by  way  of  worship,  leads  to 
winning  God’s  love;  but  it  is  safer.  Poverty  too  leads  to  the  divine  name  of  All-
Merciful.  And, 
the  name  of  All-
love,  compassion 
Compassionate, but it is a swifter and broader path. Also like ecstatic love, reflection 
leads to the name of All-Wise, but it is richer, broader, and more brilliant path. This 
path  consists  not  of  ten  steps  like  the  ten  subtle  faculties  of  some  of  the  Sufi  paths 
employing  silent  recollection,  nor  of  seven  stages  like  the  seven  souls  of  those 
practising public recitation, but of four steps. It is reality (hakikat), rather than a Sufi 
way (tarikat). It is Shari‘a. 

leads 

to 

However, let  it  not be misunderstood. It means to see one’s  impotence, poverty 
and faults before Almighty God, not to fabricate them or display them to people. The 
method of this short path is to follow the practices of the Prophet (UWBP), perform 
the  religious  obligations  and  give  up  serious  sins.  It  is  especially  to  perform  the 
prescribed  prayers  correctly  and  with  attention,  and  following  them  to  say  the 
tesbihat. 

The verse, “Therefore, do not justify yourselves,”(53:32) points to the first step. 
The verse, “And be not like those who forget God, and He therefore makes them 

forget their own selves,”(59:19) points to the second step. 

The verse, “Whatever good happens to you is from God, but whatever evil befalls 

you is from yourself,”(4:79) points to the third step. 

 

525

The  verse,  “Everything  will  perish  save  His  countenance,”(28:88)  points  to  the 

fourth step. 

First Step 

A brief explanation of these four steps is as follows: 

As  the  verse,  “Therefore, do  not  justify  yourselves”  suggests,  it is  to  not purify 
the  soul.  For  on  account  of  his  nature  and  innate  disposition,  man  loves  himself. 
Indeed,  he  loves  himself  before  anything  else,  and  only  himself.  He  sacrifices 
everything  other  than  himself  to  his  own  soul.  He  praises  himself  in  a  manner 
befitting  some  object  worthy  of  worship.  He  absolves  and  exonerates  himself  from 
faults  in  the  same  way.  As  far  as  he  possibly  can,  he  does  not  see  faults  as  being 
appropriate  for  him,  and  does  not  accept  them.  He  defends  himself  passionately  as 
though worshipping himself. Even, using on himself the members and faculties given 
him as part of his nature in order to praise and glorify the True Object of Worship, he 
displays the meaning of the verse,   

“Who takes as his god his own desires.”(25:43; 45:23) 

He considers himself, he relies on himself, he fancies himself. Thus, his purification 
and  cleansing  at  this  stage,  in  this  step,  is  to  not purify  himself;  it  is  not  to  absolve 
himself. 

Second Step 

As  the  verse,  “And  be  not  like  those  who  forget  God,  and  He  therefore  makes 
them forget their own selves” teaches, man  is oblivious of himself and not aware of 
himself.  If  he  thinks  of  death,  it  is  in  relation  to  others.  If  he  sees  transience  and 
decline,  he  does  not  attribute  them  to  himself.  His  evil-commanding  soul  demands 
that  when  it  comes  to  inconvenience  and  service  of  others,  he  forgets  himself,  but 
when it comes to receiving his recompense, and to benefits and enjoyment, he thinks 
of himself and takes his own part fervently. His purification, cleansing, and training at 
this stage is the reverse of this. That is to say, when oblivious of himself, it is not to 
be oblivious. That is, to forget himself when it comes to pleasure, and ambition and 
greed, and to think of himself when it comes to death and service of others. 

Third Step  

As  the  verse,  “Whatever  good  happens  to  you  is  from  God,  but  whatever  evil 
befalls  you  is  from  yourself”  teaches,  the  nature  of  the  evil-commanding  soul 
demands that it always considers goodness to be from itself and it becomes vain and 
conceited.  Thus,  at  this  step,  a  person  sees  only  faults,  defects,  impotence,  and 
poverty in himself, and understands  

 

526

that  all  his good qualities and perfections are bounties bestowed on him by the All-
Glorious  Creator.  He  gives  thanks  instead  of  being  conceited,  and  offers  praise 
instead of boasting. According to the meaning of the verse,  

Truly he succeeds who purifies it,(91:9) 

his purification at this stage is to know his perfection to lie in imperfection, his power 
in impotence, and his wealth in poverty. 

Fourth Step  

As  the  verse,  “Everything  will  perish  save  His  countenance”  teaches,  the  evil-
commanding  soul  considers  itself  to  be  free  and  independent  and  to  exist  of  itself. 
Because of this, man claims to possess a  sort of dominicality.  He  harbours a hostile 
rebelliousness towards his True Object of Worship. Thus, through understanding the 
following fact, he is saved from this. The fact is this: 

According  to  the  apparent  meaning  of  things,  which  looks  to  each  thing  itself, 
everything  is  transitory,  wanting,  accidental,  non-existent.  But  according  to  the 
meaning that signifies something other than itself and in respect of each thing being a 
mirror to the All-Glorious Maker’s names and charged with various duties, each is a 
witness, it is witnessed, and it is existent. The purification and cleansing of a person at 
this stage is as follows: 

In his existence he is non-existent, and in his non-existence he has existence. That 
is to say, if he values himself and attributes existence to himself, he is in the darkness 
of  non-existence  as  great  as  the  universe.  That  is,  if  he  relies  on  his  individual 
existence and is unmindful of the True Giver of Existence, he has an individual light 
of  existence  like  that  of  a  fire-fly  and  is  submerged  in  an  endless  darkness  of  non-
existence and separation. But if he gives up egotism and sees that he is a mirror of the 
manifestations  of  the  True  Giver  of  Existence,  he  gains  all  beings  and  an  infinite 
existence. For he who finds the Necessary Existent, the manifestation of whose names 
all beings manifest, finds everything. 

Conclusion 

The four steps in this way of impotence, poverty, compassion, and reflection have 
been  explained  in  the  twenty-six  Words  so  far  written,  which  are  concerned  with 
knowledge  of  reality,  the  reality  of  the  Shari‘a,  and  the  wisdom  of  the  Qur’an.  So 
here, we shall allude briefly to only one or two points, as follows: 

This path is shorter, because it consists of four steps. When impotence  

 

527

causes a person to give up the soul, it turns him directly to the All-Powerful One of 
Glory. Whereas when a person on the way of ecstatic love, the swiftest way, gives up 
the  soul,  his  way  directs  him  to  a  temporary  beloved.  Only  when  he  discovers  the 
beloved’s impermanence does he turn to the True Beloved. 

Also, this path is much safer, because the ravings and  high-flown claims of the 
soul  are  not  present  on  it.  For  apart  from  impotence,  poverty,  and  defect,  the  soul 
possesses nothing so that it oversteps its mark. 

Also,  this  path  is  much  broader  and  more  universal.  For  in  order  to  attain  to  a 
constant  awareness  of  God’s  presence,  a  person  is  not  compelled  to  imagine  the 
universe to be condemned to non-existence and to declare: “There  is  no existent but 
He,” like those who believe in the Unity of Existence, nor to suppose the universe to 
be  condemned  to  imprisonment  in  absolute  oblivion  and  to  say,  “There  is  nothing 
witnessed but He,” like those who believe in the  Unity of Witnessing. Rather, since 
the Qur’an has most explicitly pardoned the universe and released it from execution 
and  imprisonment,  the  person  on  this  path  disregards  the  above,  and  dismissing 
beings from working on their own account and employing them on account of the All-
Glorious Creator, and in the duty of manifesting the Most Beautiful Names and being 
mirrors  to  them,  he  considers  them  from  the  point  of  view  of  signifying  something 
other  than  themselves;  and  being  saved  from  absolute  heedlessness,  he  enters  the 
divine  presence  permanently;  he  finds  a  way  leading  to  the  Almighty  God  in 
everything. 

In Short: Dismissing beings from working on account of other beings, this way 

is to not look at them as signifying themselves. 

 

528

Seeds of Reality 

 [This  consists  of  aphorisms  taken  from  a  collection 
called  Hakikat 
years 
published 
Çekirdekleri.] 

thirty-five 

ago 

PREFACE to the original edition: 

For some time now, my uncle considers matters with the heart alone, rather than 
with the intellect. If something is imparted to his heart clearly, he gets me to write it 
down. He says: “Knowledge is that which may be established in the heart. If it is only 
in  the  intellect,  it  lacks  value  for  man.”  And  he  says:  “These  matters  are  not  only 
scholarly  rules,  but  certain  principles  of  mine  pertaining  to  the  heart  which  I  have 
taken as fundamental to my conscience.”  He told me to choose those I wanted from 
his “inspirations of the heart,” and I have shown the works from which I have selected 
these  aphorisms:  Nokta  min  Nuri  Ma‘rifeti’llah;  Isharat  al-I‘jaz;  Sunûhat;  Şua‘at  
Ma‘rifeti’n-Nebi; Rumûz; Tulu‘at; Muhâkemat; Münâzarat; İşârât; Qızıl Ijaz.1 

                      Compiler, his nephew, Abdurrahman 
                     (Istanbul 1336/1920) 

                                                 
1 These works were all written in Turkish with the exception of Isharat al-I’jaz and Qızıl Ijaz, which 
were written in Arabic. The former was translated into Turkish in the 1950’s by Bediuzzaman’s brother 
Abdülmecid. (Tr.) 

 

529

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate 
All praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds, 
and blessings and peace be upon our master Muhammad, 
and on all his Family and Companions. 

1.  The  prescription  for  a  sick  age,  an  ailing  nation,  an  ill  member,  is  to  follow  the 

Qur’an. 

2. The prescription for a glorious though unfortunate continent, an illustrious though 

hapless state, a noble though ownerless people, is Islamic Unity. 

3.  Someone  who  lacks  the  strength  to  raise  and  turn  the  earth  and  all  the  stars  and 
suns  as  though  they  were  the  beads  of  a  tesbih  cannot  lay  claim  to  creating 
anything in the universe. For everything is tied to everything else. 

4. The raising to life of all animate beings at the  resurrection of the dead can be  no 
more  difficult  for  divine  power  than  restoring  to  life  a  fly  in  the  spring,  heavy 
with the death-stained sleep of winter. For pre-eternal power is essential; it does 
not change; impotence cannot penetrate it; obstacles cannot intervene in it; there 
can be no degrees in it; everything is the same in relation to it. 

5. Whoever created the mosquito’s eye, created the sun. 

6. Whoever ordered the flea’s stomach, ordered the solar system. 

7.  There  is  such  miraculousness  in  the  universe’s compilation  that  if  to  suppose the 
impossible all natural causes possessed will and the power to act, they would still 
prostrate  in  utter  impotence  before  such  miraculousness,  exclaiming:  “Glory  be 
unto You! We have no power; indeed You are the Mighty, the Wise!” 

8. An actual effect has not been given to causes, for divine unity and glory require it 
to be  thus.  Only,  in  the  outer  aspect  of  things,  causes  are  a  veil  to  the  hand  of 
power;  and  this,  divine  dignity  and  grandeur  require,  so  that  in  the  superficial 
view the  hand of power should not be seen to be directly  in contact with lowly 
things. 

9.  The  inner  dimensions  of  things,  where  divine  power  has  its  connection,  are 

transparent and pure. 

10. The Manifest World is a lace veil strewn over the Worlds of the Unseen. 

11.  An  infinite  power  sufficient  to  create  all  the  universe  is  necessary  to  create  a 

single point and set it in its place. For every letter of this  

 

530

mighty  book  of  the  universe,  and  particularly  all  its  living  letters,  has  a  face 
looking to all the sentences and an eye that beholds them. 

12.  It  is  well-known:  they  all  looked  for  the  crescent  moon  of  the  ‘Id,  but  no  one 
could see it. An elderly man swore he had seen it. But what he had seen was not 
the crescent moon; it was a curved white eyelash. What is an eyelash compared 
with  the  moon?  What  is  the  motion  of  minute  particles  compared  with  the  one 
who fashions all beings? 

13.  Nature  resembles  a  printing-press,  not  the  printer.  It  is  an  embroidery,  not  the 
Embroiderer. It is passive, not active. It is a pattern, not a source. It is an order, 
and not the Orderer. It is a law, not a power. It is a code of laws proceeding from 
a will, not an external reality. 

14.  The  lure  and  attraction  in  the  conscience,  which  is  the  essential  nature  of 

conscious beings, is felt through the appeal of a drawing truth. 

15.  The  essential  nature  of  beings  does  not  lie.  The  inclination  to  grow  in  a  seed 
declares: “I shall sprout and produce fruit!”  It speaks the truth. An egg displays 
the desire for life; it says: “I shall be a hen!,” and this comes about, with divine 
permission.  It  speaks  the truth.  Owing  to  the  inclination  to  freeze,  a  handful  of 
water says: “I shall take up more space!,” and unyielding iron cannot give it the 
lie;  the  rightness  of  its  words  splits  the  iron.  These  inclinations  are  the 
manifestations of the creative commands proceeding from divine will. 

16. Pre-eternal power, which does not leave ants  without a prince or bees without a 
queen, certainly does not leave mankind without prophets. As the Splitting of the 
Moon was a miracle of Muhammad (UWBP) for men in the Manifest World, so 
his  Ascension  was  a  supreme  miracle  before  the  angels and  spirit  beings  in the 
World  of  the  Inner  Dimensions  of  Things.  Through  this  clear  wonder,  the 
sainthood  of  his  prophethood  was  proved,  and  like  lightning  or  the  moon,  that 
shining Being scattered light through those inner worlds. 

17.  The  two  phrases  of  the  confession  of faith  testify  to  each  other.  The  first  is  the 
proof of cause to effect of the second, while the second is the proof of effect to 
cause of the first. 

18. Life is a sort of manifestation of unity within multiplicity, and therefore leads to 

unity. Life makes one thing the owner of everything. 

19. Spirit is a law possessing external existence, a conscious law. Like the stable and 
enduring laws of creation, spirit comes from the World of the Divine Command 
and  the  attribute  of  will.  Divine  power  clothes  it  an  existence  decked  out  with 
senses. He makes a subtle, flowing being  

 

531

the shell to that jewel. Existent spirit is the brother of the conceivable law. They 
are  both  enduring  and  come  from  the  World  of  the  Divine  Command.  If  pre-
eternal power had clothed the laws governing in the species of beings in external 
existence, they would have been spirits. And if the spirit banishes consciousness, 
it still would be an undying law. 

20. Beings are  visible through  light, and their existence  is  known through life. Both 

are revealers. 

21.  Christianity  will  either  erupt,  or  being  purified  will  lay  down  its  arms  before 
Islam.  It  was  split  apart  several  times  and  Protestantism  emerged.  Then 
Protestantism was rent and approached the true affirmation of divine unity. It  is 
preparing to be rent again. It will either erupt and be extinguished, or it will see 
before it the truths of Islam, which encompass the basis of true Christianity, and 
it will lay down its arms. 

The  Prophet  Muhammad  (Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace)  alluded  to  this 
great mystery when  he said: “Jesus will come having descended from the skies; 
he will be of my community and will act in accordance with my Shari‘a.”2 

22.  It  is  the  sacredness  of  the  authority  more  than proof  that  drives  the  mass  of  the 

people to comply with it. 

23.  The  essentials and  incontestable  matters  of  religion,  which  form  ninety-nine  per 
cent, are each diamond pillars, while the controversial matters which are open to 
interpretation  form  only  ten  per  cent.  Ninety  diamond  pillars  may  not  be  put 
under  the  protection  of  ten  gold  pillars.  Books  and  interpretations  should  be 
telescopes  for  observing  the  Qur’an;  they  should  be  mirrors;  not  shadows  or 
deputies! 

24. Anyone who is capable may make interpretations of the law for his own self; but 

he cannot make the law. 

25.  Calling  others  to  accept  an  idea  is  dependent  on  acceptance  by  the  ‘ulama; 

otherwise it is innovation, and should be rejected. 

26.  Since  by  nature  man  is  noble,  he  seeks  the  truth.  Sometimes  he  encounters  the 
false, but supposing it to be the truth preserves it in his heart. Then, when delving 
into reality, without his willing it misguidance strikes him on the head; supposing 
it to be reality, he plunges his head into it. 

27. Divine power has many mirrors, each more subtle and transparent than  

                                                 
2 Bukhari, Anbiya’, 49; Muslim, Iman, 242-7; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 62; Musnad, iv, 226. 

 

532

the  last; they  vary from water to air, and air to ether, and ether to the World of 
Similitudes; from the World of Similitudes to the World of Spirits, and even to 
time, and to thought. A single word in the mirror of the air becomes millions of 
words. The Pen of Power writes this mystery of reproduction in truly wondrous 
manner. The reflection contains either its identity or its identity together with its 
nature. The images of dense beings are moving but dead. While the images of a 
luminous spirit in their own mirrors are living and linked with it; even if they are 
not identical, they are not other than it. 

28. Since the sun shakes itself in its axial rotation, its fruits do not fall; whereas if it 

did not shake itself, the planets would fall and be scattered. 

29.  If  the  light  of  thought  is  not illuminated  with  the  light  of the  heart  and  blended 
with it, it is darkness and breeds tyranny. If the white of the eye, which resembles 
day, were not together with its black pupil, which resembles night, the eye would 
not be the eye;  it would be unseeing. Similarly,  if the black  core of the  heart is 
not present in white thought, it lacks insight.  

30.  If  knowledge  lacks  the  insight  of  the  heart,  it  is  ignorance.  Taking  the  part  of 

something is one thing, belief is something else. 

31. Embroidering meaningless things is for misleading simple minds. 

32. A learned guide should be a sheep, not a bird. A sheep gives its lamb milk, while 

a bird gives its chick regurgitated food. 

33. The existence of something  is dependent on the existence of all  its parts. As for 
non-existence,  since  it  occurs  though  non-existence  of  one  part,  a  weak  man 
supports destruction in order to demonstrate his power; he acts negatively instead 
of positively. 

34.  If  the  laws of  government are  not  combined with  the  principles  of wisdom,  and 
the bonds of force not combined with the  laws of truth, they will  not be fruitful 
among the mass of the people. 

35. Tyranny has donned the hat of justice; treachery has clothed itself in the garment 
of  patriotism;  jihad  has  been  given  the  name  of  rebellion;  captivity  has  been 
called freedom! Opposites have exchanged forms! 

36. Politics which revolves around benefit is savagery. 

37.  To  show  friendliness  towards  a  hungry  beast  excites  not  its  compassion  but  its 

hunger. Both its fangs and its claws will want their rent! 

38. Time has shown that Paradise is not cheap, and neither is Hell unnecessary. 

 

533

39. While the qualities of those known by the world as the upper classes should be the 
cause of modesty and humility, they have  led to oppression and arrogance. And 
while the poverty  and powerlessness of the poor and common people should be 
the  cause  of  compassion  and  bounty,  they  have  resulted  in  servitude  and 
enthralment. 

40. So long as honour and good things are to be obtained from something, they offer 
it  to  the  upper  classes,  but  if  it  is  something  bad,  they  divide  it  among  the 
ordinary people. 

41. If a person lacks an imagined goal, or if he forgets it or pretends to forget it, his 

thoughts will perpetually revolve around his ‘I’. 

42.  The  origin  of  all  revolutions and  corruption,  and  the spur  and  source of  all  bad 

morals are just two sayings: 

The First Saying: “So long as I’m full, what is it to me if others die of hunger?” 

The Second Saying: “You suffer hardship so that I can live in ease; you work so 
that I can eat.” 

There  is  only  one  remedy  for  extirpating  the  first  saying,  and  that  is  the 
obligatory payment of zakat. While the remedy for the second is the prohibition 
of usury and interest. Qur’anic justice stands at the door of the world and says to 
usury and interest:  “No entry!  It is  forbidden! You don’t have the right to enter 
here!”  Mankind  did  not  heed  the  command,  and  received  a  severe  blow.  So  it 
must heed it before it receives one even more severe! 

43.  War  between  nations  and  states  is  relinquishing  its  place  to  war  between  the 
classes of mankind. For just as man does not want to be a slave, so he does not 
want to be a labourer. 

44. The person who pursues his goal by illicit means is usually punished by receiving 
the  opposite  of  what  he  intended.  The  recompense  for  illicit  love,  like  love  for 
Europe, is the beloved’s cruel enmity. 

45. The past and calamities should be considered in the light of Divine Determining  
(kader), while the future and sins from the point of view of responsibility before 
God. The Jabriyya and Mu‘tazila are reconciled on this point. 

46.  Impotence  should  not  be  resorted  to  when  a  solution  may  be  found,  and  when 
there is no solution, punishment should not be resorted to. 

47. Life’s wounds may be  healed, but Islamic pride and honour, and national pride, 

their wounds are extremely deep. 

48. It sometimes happens that a single word causes an army to perish, and  

 

534

one  bullet  leads  to  the  annihilation  of  thirty  million.3 Some conditions  are  such 
that  a  small  act  raises  man  to  the  highest  of  the  high,  while  in  others  a  small 
action relegates him to the lowest of the low. 

49. One grain of truth consumes a stack of lies. One  grain of reality  is superior to a 
stack  of  illusions.  Everything  you  say  should  be  true,  but  it  is  not  right  to  say 
everything true. 

50. A person who sees the  good in things  has  good thoughts. And he who has good 

thoughts receives pleasure from life. 

51. What gives life to people is hope; what kills them is despair. 

52.  Since  early  days,  this  Islamic  state  took  on  itself  the  upholding  of  the  Word  of 
God, the maintenance of independence, and jihad for Islam, an obligation which 
if undertaken by part of the community, released the rest; it considered itself to be 
charged  with  sacrificing  itself  for  Islam,  which  was  united,  and  carrying  the 
banner of the Caliphate. The misfortune it now suffers will therefore be made up 
for by the future prosperity and freedom of the Islamic World. For this calamity 
has  speeded  up  in  wondrous  fashion  the  growth  of  Islamic  brotherhood,  the 
leaven of our lives. 

53. To attribute to Christianity the  virtues of civilization, which are  not its property, 
and to show retrogression, the enemy of Islam, to be its friend, is to suggest that 
the firmament is revolving in the opposite direction. 

54. A tarnished, matchless diamond is always superior to a piece of glistening glass. 

55. Those who seek everything in materiality know only what their eyes see, and such 

eyes are blind in spiritual matters. 

56.  If  metaphors  fall  from  the  hands  of  learning  into  those  of  ignorance,  they  are 

transformed into their literal meanings, opening the door to superstition. 

57. Favour greater than divine favour is not favour. Everything has to be described as 

58. Fame ascribes to man what is not his. 

59. Hadiths are the source of life and inspirer of reality. 

60. The revival of religion is the revival of the nation. The life of religion is the light 

it is. 

of life. 

                                                 
3 A single bullet fired by a Serbian soldier at the Austrian crown-prince set off the Great War, and was 
the cause of thirty million souls being lost. 

 

535

61. The Qur’an, which is a mercy for mankind, only accepts a civilization that allows 
for the happiness of all, or at least of the majority. Modern civilization has been 
founded on five negative principles: 

Its point of support is force, the mark of which is aggression. 

Its aim and goal is benefit, the mark of which is jostling and tussling. 

Its principle in life is conflict, the mark of which is strife. 

The  bond between  the  masses  is  racialism  and  negative  nationalism,  which 
are nourished through devouring others; their mark is collision. 

Its enticing service is inciting lust and passion and gratifying the desires. But 
lust transforms man into a beast. 

As  for  the  civilization  the  Shari‘a  of  Muhammad  (UWBP)  comprises  and 
commands, it is as follows:  

Its point of support is truth instead of force, the mark of which is justice and 
harmony.  

Its goal is virtue in place of benefit, the mark of which is love and attraction.  

Its  means  of  unity  are  the  ties  of  religion,  country,  and  class,  in  place  of 
racialism  and  nationalism,  and  the  mark  of  these  is  sincere  brotherhood, 
peace, and only defence against external aggression.  

In life its principle is mutual assistance instead of conflict, the mark of which 
is accord and solidarity.  

And it offers guidance instead of lust, the mark of which is human progress 
and spiritual advancement. 

Do not loosen your hands from Islam, the preserver of our existence; cling onto it 
with all your strength or you shall be lost! 

62. A general disaster results from the error of the majority. Disaster  is the result of 

crime and the introduction to reward. 

63. A martyr supposes himself to be alive. He did not suffer the pangs of death, so he 
thinks the life he sacrificed is perpetual and has not been severed. But he finds it 
purer. 

64. The pure justice of the Qur’an does not spill  the  life-blood of an  innocent, even 
for the whole of humanity. The two are equal in the view of both divine power, 
and justice. Self-interest, however, makes man such that he will destroy anything 
that impedes his ambition, even the world if he can, and mankind. 

 

536

65. Fear and weakness invite outside influences. 

66. Definite benefits should not be sacrificed for imaginary harms. 

67. Istanbul politics at the present time are as sick as Spanish ’flu. 

68. Tell a bad man, “You are good, you are good,” and it is not unheard of that he will 
become good. And tell a good man “You are bad, you are bad,” and it is not rare 
for him to become bad. 

69. So long as the enemy of an enemy remains his enemy, he is a friend; and so long 

as the friend of an enemy remains his friend, he is an enemy. 

70. Obduracy is this: if Satan assists someone, he calls him an angel and calls down 
blessings  on  him.  But  if  among  his  opponents  he  encounters  an  angel,  he  calls 
him a satan in other clothes and curses him. 

71. The remedy for one ill may be poison for another. An excessive dose is the cause 

of ills. 

72.  Solidarity  in  a  society  results  in  harmony  in  all  its  activites,  while  mutual  envy 

causes all its activities to come to a standstill. 

73.  If  the  community  is  not  one  and  a  whole,  undivided  number,  addition  makes 

smaller, like multiplying fractions.4 

74. Non-acceptance  is confused with the  acceptance of  non-being. The  evidence  for 
non-acceptance is the absence of established proof. The acceptance of non-being 
requires proof of non-being. One is doubt while the other is denial. 

75. If doubt in the questions of belief destroys one, or even a  hundred, evidences, it 

does not harm what is posited; for there are hundreds of evidences. 

76.  The  majority  of  Muslims  should  be  followed.  For  when  they  followed  the 
majority  the  Umayyads,  who  were  slack  in  religion,  finally  entered  the  Sunni 
community.  As  for  the  Shi‘a,  who  were  firm  in  religion  but  remained  in  the 
minority  as  regards  their  practices,  finally  only  a  part  of  them  followed  the 
Rafida. 

77.  If  unanimity  concerning  good  leads  to  conflict  concerning  what  is  better,  then 
sometimes  good  is  better  than  the  better;  right  is  truer  than  what  is  truer. 
Everyone should say about his own way that “It is right,”  

                                                 
4 It is well-known that in arithmetic, multiplication and addition increase: four times four makes 
sixteen, while in fractions, on the contrary multiplication and addition make smaller: a third multiplied 
by a third makes a ninth. In just the same way, if there is not integral wholeness, correctness, and unity 
among people, by multiplying they become smaller, spoilt, and valueless. 

 

537

he should not say “it is the only right way.” Or he should say, “It is good,” but he 
should not say “It is the only good way.” 

78. If Paradise did not exist, Hell would not be torment. 

79. As time grows older, the Qur’an grows younger; it signs become apparent. Just as 
light sometimes appears to be fire, so sometimes intense eloquence appears to be 
exaggeration. 

80.  Degrees  in  heat  occur  through  the  intervention  of  cold;  the  degrees  of  beauty 
occur  through  the  intervention  of  ugliness.  Pre-eternal  power  is  essential, 
necessary, and inherent. Impotence cannot penetrate it; there can be no degrees it 
in; everything is equal in relation to it. 

81. The sun’s image, which  is the  effulgence of its manifestation, displays the same 

identity on the surface of the sea and in all its droplets. 

82. Life is a manifestation of  unity; unity is also its consequence. 

83.  So  long  as  it  remains  unknown  who  are  the  saints  among  men,  which  moment 
prayers are accepted on Fridays, which night in Ramadan is the Night of Power, 
and which among the divine names is the greatest name, other things retain their 
value and importance is given to them. Twenty years of doubtful life is preferable 
to a thousand years’ life the end of which is specified. 

84. The consequence of sin in this world is evidence for its punishment in the next. 

85.  In  the  view  of  power,  sustenance  is  as  important  as  life.  Power  brings  into 
existence, Divine  Determining clothes  in  form, divine favour nurtures. Life  is a 
summary, a specified product and is apparent. Sustenance is not a summary; it is 
gradual  and  widespread,  and  provokes  thought.  No  one  dies  from  hunger,  for 
death occurs before the food stored up in the body in the form of fat is exhausted. 
That  is  to  say,  illness  resulting  from  the  giving  up  of  habit  kills,  not  lack  of 
sustenance. 

86. The licit sustenance of carniverous wild animals are the innumerable remains of 
dead animals; they both cleanse the face of the earth, and they find their food. 

87.  Before  entering  the  mouth  and  disappearing  down  the  throat,  a  mouthful  worth 
one  kurush  and  one  worth  ten  are  the  same.  There  is  only  a  few  seconds’ 
difference in the mouth. To raise the price from one to ten in order to gratify the 
sense  of  taste,  which  is  like  an  inspector  and  doorkeeper,  is  most  prodigal  and 
wasteful. 

88. When pleasure calls, a person should say: “It is as though I ate it.” (Sanki yedim.) 

For a person who took it as his guiding principle, could  

 

538

have eaten a mosque called “Sanki Yedim,” but he didn’t.5 

89. Formerly, most Muslims did not go hungry; they desired a comfortable life. Now 

they are hungry, and they have no wish for pleasure. 

90.  Temporary  pains  rather  than  temporary  pleasure  should  be  greeted  with  smiles 
and  welcomed.  For  past  pleasures  make  one  say:  “Alas!”,  and  “Alas!”  is  an 
expression of concealed pain. While past pains make one say: “Oh!”, and “Oh!” 
tells of permanent pleasure and bounty. 

91. Forgetfulness  is also a bounty;  it allows one  to suffer the pains of only one day 

and causes the rest to be forgotten. 

92. Every calamity holds a degree of bounty, like a degree of heat. One should think 
of greater calamities and should note the degree of bounty in the small one, and 
thank God. For if the calamity is blown up, it will grow; and if it is worried over, 
it  will  double;  the  image,  the  imagining,  in  the  heart  will  be  transformed  into 
reality; and they will pound the heart as well. 

93. In society as a whole, everyone has a window, known as rank, through which to 
see  and  be  seen.  If  the  window  is  higher  than  a  person’s  stature,  he  will  grow 
taller through arrogance, but if it  is  lower, he will bow down out of modesty to 
see and be seen at that level. The measure of greatness in man is smallness, that 
is, modesty. The scale of smallness is bigness; that is, arrogance. 

94. The dignity of the weak before the strong becomes arrogance in the strong; while 
the modesty of the strong before the weak becomes abasement in the weak. The 
seriousness of someone in authority in their office is dignity, and his humility is 
abasement.  While  his  seriousness  in  his  house  is  haughtiness,  and  his  humility, 
modesty. If an individual is on his own, then  his  tolerance and self-sacrifice are 
good acts. But if he  is more than one and attached to others, they are treachery 
and inauspicious. Someone should swallow his pride in his own name and not be 
boastful, but he may boast in the name of his nation and should not swallow his 
pride. 

95. To leave it to others in planning the preliminaries of a matter is laziness, while in 
awaiting the outcome it  is reliance on God. Resignation with the  fruits of one’s 
labour and with fate is contentment, and strengthens the wish to strive. Whereas 
making do with what exists is to lack enterprise. 

                                                 
5 That is, the person put aside the money saved through his abstinence, and built the mosque with the 
proceeds. It is in the Fatih district of Istanbul. (Tr.) 

 

539

96.  Just  as  there  are  obedience  and  rebellion  in  the  face  of  the  commands  of  the 
Shari‘a, so there are obedience and rebellion in the face of the creative commands 
in the universe. With regard to the first, the reward and punishment are mostly in 
the hereafter, while with the second, they are mostly in this world. For example, 
the  reward  for  patience  is  victory;  the  punishment  for  idleness  is  poverty;  the 
reward for effort is wealth, and the reward for constancy, triumph. Justice without 
equality is not justice. 

97.  Mutual  resemblance  is  the  cause  of  contradiction;  congruity  is  the  basis  of 
solidarity;  smallness  of  character  is  the  source  of  arrogance;  weakness  is  the 
source of pride; impotence is the source of opposition; and curiosity is the teacher 
of knowledge. 

98. Through  need, and especially through  hunger, the Creator’s power has reined in 
foremost  man,  and  all  the  animals,  and  put  them  in  order.  Also,  He  saved  the 
world  from  anarchy,  and  making  need  the  master  of  civilization,  ensured 
progress. 

99. Distress teaches vice; despair is the source of misguidance; and darkness of heart, 

100.  When  men  become  amiable  through  following  their  fancies,  women  become 

the source of spiritual distress. 

masculine by being impudent. 

A beautiful woman entering  a  gathering of brothers awakens  hypocrisy, rivalry, 
and  envy.  That  is  to  say,  the  unveiling  of  women  led  to  the  unveiling  of  bad 
morals in civilized man. 

101.  The  represented  forms  of  little  smiling  corpses  have  played  a  large  role  in 

making the evil-polluted perverse spirit of modern man what it is. 

102. The prohibited statue is either petrified tyranny, or embodied lust, or personified 

hypocrisy. 

103.  For  someone  who  has  truly  entered  into  the  bounds  of  Islam  by  conforming 
precisely  to  its  incontestable  matters,  the  desire  to  expand  is  the  desire  to  be 
perfected.  But  for  someone  deemed  outside  those  bounds  due  to  slackness,  the 
desire  to  expand  is  the  desire  to  destroy.  In  time  of  storm  and  earthquake,  it  is 
advisable  to  not  open  the  door  of  ijtihad,  and  to  close  the  windows  too.  The 
overly free and easy should not be indulged with dispensations, but determinedly 
and severely warned. 

104. Unfortunate truths become worthless in worthless hands. 

105. Our globe resembles a living being; it displays the signs of life.  

 

540

Would it not become a sort of animal if it were reduced to the size of an egg? Or 
if a microbe were to be enlarged to the size of the globe, would it not resemble it? 
If it has life, it has a spirit too. If the world were reduced to the size of man, and 
the  stars  made  the  particles  and  substance  of  his  being,  would  it  not  also  be  a 
living conscious being? God has many such animals. 

106. There are two Shari‘as: 

The  First  is  the  Shari‘a  that  we  know which  orders  the  actions  and  conduct of 
man, the microcosm, and proceeds from the attribute of speech. 

The Second is the Supreme Shari‘a of Creation, which orders the motion and rest 
of  the  world,  the  macroanthropos,  proceeds  from  the  attribute  of  will,  and  is 
sometimes wrongly called nature. The angels are a vast community; they are the 
bearers,  representatives,  and  personifications  of  the  creative  commands  which 
proceed from the attribute of will and are the Shari‘a of Creation. 

107.  If  you  weigh  the  senses  of  a  microscopic  organism  against  man’s  senses,  you 
will observe a strange mystery: man is in the form of Ya. Sin., inscribed in him is 
the Sura Ya. Sin. 

108.  Materialism  is  a  spiritual  plague  that  has  infected  man  with  a  terrible  fever, 
causing him to be visited by divine wrath. The more the ability to inculcate and 
criticize expands, so does that plague spread. 

109. The most wretched, distressed, and suffering of men is the man with no work, for 
idleness is the cousin of non-existence. Labour, however, is the life of existence 
and the waking state of life. 

110. Profiting from banks, the doors of usury and interest, is for the infidels, who are 
the  worst  of  men,  and  for  the  most  tyrannous  of  the  former,  and  for  the  most 
degenerate  of  the  latter.  Banks  cause  absolute  harm  to  the  Islamic  world,  so 
mankind’s affluence should not be taken into consideration. For if the infidels are 
warmongers and aggressive, so they are disrespectful and without honour. 

111. The purpose of the khutba during the Friday Prayers is to mention the essentials 
and  incontestable  matters  of  religion,  not  to  instruct  in  theoretical  matters.  The 
Arabic terms recall the essentials best.  

112.  When  Hadiths  and  Qur’anic  verses  are  balanced, it  is  clear  that  even  the  most 

eloquent of men cannot attain to the verses’ eloquence nor resemble them. 

                                                         S a i d  N u r s i 

 

541

O  God! O  Most  Merciful!  O  Most Compassionate!  O  Single  One!  O 
Ever-Living  One!  O  Self-Subsistent  One!  O  Sapient  One!  O  All-Just 
One!  O  Most  Holy!  For  the  sake  of  Your  Greatest  Name,  and  in 
veneration of the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition, and in honour of 
Your  Most  Noble  Messenger,  Upon  whom  be  blessings  and  peace, 
bestow  everlasting  happiness  in  Paradise  on  the  publishers  of  this 
book,  the  Letters  of  Bediuzzaman  Said  Nursi,  and  on  all  those  who 
assist them. Amen! And grant them unending success in the service of 
belief and the Qur’an. Amen! And for each word of the Letters write a 
thousand merits in the books of their good deeds. Amen! And bestow 
on  them  perseverance,  constancy,  and  sincerity  in  publishing  the 
Risale-i Nur. Amen!  
O  Most  Merciful of  the  Merciful!  Grant happiness  in  this world and 
the next to all the Students of the Risale-i Nur. Amen! Preserve them 
from  the  evil  of  satans  among  jinn  and  men.  Amen!  And  forgive  the 
faults of this powerless and wretched Said. Amen! 

In the name of all the Students of the Risale-i Nur, 

                                    S a i d  N u r s i 

